                                                                                                                                                                                      1




                                                Spiking Optical Flow for Event-based Sensors
                                                Using IBM’s TrueNorth Neurosynaptic System
                                                      Germain Haessig, Andrew Cassidy, Rodrigo Alvarez, Ryad Benosman and Garrick Orchard




                                            Abstract—This paper describes a fully spike-based neural                  general, but are more power efficient (PX4Flow [8], optical
                                         network for optical flow estimation from Dynamic Vision Sensor               mouse). Direction selective neurons are found as early as the
                                         data. A low power embedded implementation of the method                      retina in frogs [9], cats [10], rabbits, primates, and many other
                                         which combines the Asynchronous Time-based Image Sensor with
arXiv:1710.09820v1 [cs.CV] 26 Oct 2017




                                         IBM’s TrueNorth Neurosynaptic System is presented. The sensor                animals.
                                         generates spikes with sub-millisecond resolution in response                    A key difference between optical flow estimation in bio-
                                         to scene illumination changes. These spike are processed by                  logical and artificial systems lies in the format of the data
                                         a spiking neural network running on TrueNorth with a 1                       from which optical flow is extracted. Both approaches start
                                         millisecond resolution to accurately determine the order and                 off with light from a scene focused on an image sensor, but
                                         time difference of spikes from neighbouring pixels, and therefore
                                         infer the velocity. The spiking neural network is a variant of the           most artificial systems convert this light signal into a sequence
                                         Barlow Levick method for optical flow estimation. The system                 of static digital images from which optical flow must later be
                                         is evaluated on two recordings for which ground truth motion                 estimated. The retina works on a different principle, transducing
                                         is available, and achieves an Average Endpoint Error of 11% at               the light signal into a continuous electrical signal, and later
                                         an estimated power budget of under 80mW for the sensor and                   into discrete spikes for communication to the lateral geniculate
                                         computation.
                                                                                                                      nucleus and downstream visual cortex.
                                            Index Terms—Neuromorphic vision, Event-Based imaging,                        Not all artificial methods rely on static images though. Tanner
                                         Neuromorphic hardware, Optical flow, Spiking neural network.                 and Mead [11] introduced the first analog two dimensional
                                                                                                                      optical flow chip, extracting a global motion from a given scene
                                                                    I. I NTRODUCTION                                  on dedicated hardware. Delbruck [12] also implemented such
                                                                                                                      a network in VLSI. More recently, with the new event-based

                                         E     STIMATION of optical flow is a computationally inten-
                                               sive task. Modern artificial systems achieve ever higher
                                         accuracy on the task at the expense of more complex algorithms
                                                                                                                      cameras, some spike based techniques have been proposed
                                                                                                                      [13], but they require a dedicated computer for processing. An
                                                                                                                      extensive review of motion estimation designs can be found in
                                         and more powerful computing hardware such as GPUs. On
                                                                                                                      [14].
                                         the other hand, many biological systems are able to estimate
                                                                                                                         Over the last decade, so-called silicon-retinae have matured
                                         optical flow both effectively and power-efficiently. Examples
                                                                                                                      to a level where they are now publicly available (described later
                                         include insects such as bees and drosophilia, which rely heavily
                                                                                                                      in Section II-B). These bio-inspired devices provide a spiking
                                         on optical flow for navigation [1], but must estimate optical
                                                                                                                      output more similar to the biological retina. Recently many
                                         flow under severe size, weight, and power constraints. While
                                                                                                                      papers have proposed different methods for processing data,
                                         the optical flow estimated by such insect may not rival modern
                                                                                                                      including for estimating optical flow. Benosman et al. [13]
                                         computer vision approaches in terms of accuracy, the estimated
                                                                                                                      proposed a plane fitting approach which estimates the motion
                                         flow is good enough for the insects to use in navigation, and
                                                                                                                      of sharp edges. Later, Barranco et al. [15] proposed a method
                                         impressive considering the tight constraints under which the
                                                                                                                      which also estimates flow at edges, but their method estimates
                                         estimates were generated.
                                                                                                                      the magnitude of the spatial and temporal image gradients at
                                            In artificial systems, early optical flow estimation approaches the edge and then relies on a gradient-based method for optical
                                         relied on methods such as velocity-tuned filters in the frequency flow estimation. Bardow et al. [16] apply a variational method
                                         domain [2], [3], phase-based methods [4], gradient based which simultaneously estimates both the image grayscale values
                                         methods, and correlation based methods [5]. The accuracy and optical flow from events. By enforcing spatial and temporal
                                         of these methods for optical flow estimation on sequences smoothness constraints, their method generates optical flow
                                         of images has long since been surpassed by even more estimates even for image regions where no gradient information
                                         computationally intensive methods which estimate flow at is available.
                                         multiple scales [6], and more recently by convolutional neural                  Some optical flow estimation methods take bio-inspiration a
                                         networks [7], which are mostly running on power inneficient step further and make use of biologically inspired computation
                                         GPUs or dedicated ASICs, which are less accurate, more using spiking neurons to extract optical flow. Examples include
                                            G. Haessig and R. Benosman are with the Vision and Natural Computation    Brosch et al. implementing a phase based method [17],
                                         team, Institut de la vision, Universite Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France Conradt et al. implementing a Reichardt detector [18], and
                                         e-mail: germain.haessig@inserm.fr                                            Orchard et al. [19] who simulated a method relying on synaptic
                                            A. Cassidy and R. Alvarez are with IBM Research, Austin, USA.
                                            G. Orchard is with Temasek Laboratories and the Singapore Institute for delays.
                                         Neurotechnology at the National University of Singapore, Singapore.             In this paper we propose a Spiking Neural Network variant
                                                                                                                                   2



                                                                          Preferred direction

                                                                                                    Exc


                                                                                                    Inh




                                                                            ex




                                                                                        h
                                                                                       in
                                                                             c
                                                                                                    Out


                                                                                                                            time




                                                                             Null direction
Fig. 1: Working principle of the ATIS camera. (left) A
significant relative change of the luminance (programmable                                          Exc
threshold n) generates an ON (respectively OFF) event when
there is an increase (resp. decrease) in luminosity. (right)




                                                                            ex
                                                                                                    Inh




                                                                                        h
                                                                                       in
                                                                             c
Snapshot of events over 100 ms for a car passing in front
of the camera. White dots represents ON events, black ones                                          Out    NO SPIKES
OFF events.
                                                                                                                            time


of the Barlow & Levick model [10], using a silicon retina Fig. 2: Direction Sensitive (DS) unit. A stimulus from left
coupled with IBM’s TrueNorth Neurosynaptic System.                to right first excite (yellow cell) the output (gray), which is
   The method exploits precise spike timing provided by self-excitatory until it gets an strong inhibitory input (blue cell),
the silicon retina to reliably extract motion direction and as a movement in the other direction (right to left) doesn’t
amplitude from a scene in real-time. Such methods promise produce any output. Thus, this unit is directive to a specified
to allow for low power visual motion estimation in real-time. direction. More, the timing between the beginning and the
TrueNorth is estimated to consume 70mW and the silicon end of the output spiking give an information of the (inverse)
retina consumes approximately 10mW (chip only, omitting velocity. Inspired by [20].
FPGA for communication, which can be removed for dedicated
applications). This setup can then easily be used in embedded
                                                                  of the spike burst encodes the time taken for the edge to
devices such as drones or autonomous driving.
                                                                  pass from the orange pixel to the blue pixel, thus providing
Section II introduces both the model, IBM’s TrueNorth
                                                                  information on the edge velocity in the preferred direction.
Neurosynaptic System, and the silicon retina. Details of the         For motion in the opposite direction (leftward) the inhibition
model implementation are given in Section III. Section IV from the blue pixel will arrive before the excitation from the
describes how the model was tested, and results of testing are orange pixel. Due to the initial inhibition, the later excitation
described in Section V, followed by discussion in Section VI. from the orange pixel is not sufficient to drive the DS neuron
                                                                  membrane potential above threshold, and thus the DS neuron
                       II. BACKGROUND                             does not spike in response to leftward motion.
A. Direction Sensitive (DS) Unit                                     The full direction is obtained with a combination of four
   The basis of the network, introduced in [20], is described single DS units, as shown in Fig. 3.
in Fig. 2. The original model, inspired by the neural circuitry      In implementation, there is a possibility of receiving an
found in the rabbit’s retina by Barlow and Levick [10] is isolated noise spike from the orange pixel, which would
based on inhibition-based direction-sensitive units, combined cause the DS neuron to begin bursting, and continue bursting
in motion detectors.                                              indefinitely. To handle this case, a delayed copy of the spikes
   Fig. 2 shows a simplified Direction Selective (DS) neuron from the orange pixel are used to inhibit the DS neuron, thus
which responds (spikes) to the detection of motion in its limiting the maximum burst length to the length of delay used.
preferred direction (rightward). The DS neuron (gray) receives
inputs from two neighbouring ATIS pixels (bipolar cells). Each B. Event-based Sensor
ATIS pixel (orange and blue) will generate an output spike           Conventional image sensors sample the visual scene at fixed
when stimulated by the passing of an edge. For motion in the temporal periods (framerate). All pixels acquire light in a
preferred direction (rightward), the edge will pass over the synchronous fashion by integrating photons over a fixed time-
orange pixel first, and the blue pixel second.                    period. When observing a dynamic scene, this framerate, no
   When the edge passes over the orange pixel, a spike is matter its value, will always be wrong because there is no
generated and the DS neuron is excited. The excitatory input relation whatsoever between the temporal dynamics of the
triggers a burst of spikes from the DS neuron. The burst scene and the acquisition period. This leads to simultaneous
continues until the edge passes over the blue pixel, at which over-sampling and under-sampling of different parts of the
point the blue pixel will generate an output spike which inhibits scene, motion blur for moving objects, and data redundancy
the DS neuron, causing the spike burst to end. The time-length for static background.
                                                                                                                                3




                                                                                 Synaptic grid
                              DS




                                                                             …
                              N




                                                                    Inputs
                             x,y+1



                                                                                            …
                                                                                  Neurons
       DS         x-1,y       x,y        x+1,y       DS
       W                                             E                           (a)                           (b)
                                                                  Fig. 4: a) The TrueNorth topology. Each neurosynaptic core
                                                                  has 256 axons, 256×256 synapse crossbar and 256 neurons.
                              x,y-1
                                                                  Information flows from axons to neurons gated by binary
                                                                  synapses, where each axon fans out, in parallel, to all neurons
                                                                  thus achieving a 256-fold reduction in communication volume
                              DS                                  compared to a point-to-point approach. Network operation
                              S                                   is governed by a discrete time step. In a time step, if the
                                                                  synapse value for a particular axon-neuron pair is non-zero
                                                                  and the axon is active, then the neuron updates its state by the
Fig. 3: Assembly of the 4 DS units (North, South, West,
                                                                  synaptic weight corresponding to the axon type. Next, each
East). The direction of the movement is gathered by taking
                                                                  neuron applies a leak, and any neuron whose state exceeds its
in consideration, for each pixel, a vertical and horizontal
                                                                  threshold fires a spike [25]. b) IBM’s NS1e board (4096 cores,
component. Inspired by [20].
                                                                  1 Million neurons and 256 Million synapses) and ATIS sensor
                                                                  with native link used for this paper.

   Event-based sensors [21], also known as silicon retinae, are
an alternative to fixed-frequency imaging devices. In these                             III. I MPLEMENTATION
devices, a time-varying signal is sampled on its amplitude-axis         TrueNorth implementation of the model was achieved by
instead of time-axis, leading to a non-uniform sampling rate carefully configuring a single tile-able TrueNorth core, thanks
that matches the temporal dynamics of the signal, as shown to the tools presented in [26], to handle a small local region of
on Fig. 1. The Asynchronous Time-based Image Sensor (ATIS the input space, and then tiling enough copies of these cores
[22]) is an QVGA array of asynchronous independent pixels, to cover the full input image.
each combining a change detection unit and an absolute gray             Within each core, neurons are divided into three main
level measurement unit. Each time a pixel detects a significant modules, shown in different colors in Fig. 5. The first module
change in luminance in its field of view, an event is generated. (red) receives input spikes from ATIS and generates a copy of
Each event can be represented as a triplet evi = (xi , ti , pi ), evi these spikes which can be used for further processing by the
being the i − th event, where xi is the event spatial coordinates, other two modules. The second module (blue) implements the
ti its timestamp and pi its polarity, indicating if the change is delay required to generate the delayed inhibition for the DS
an increase or decrease in luminance. In this work, only the neurons. The third module (green) implements the DS neurons.
change detection unit is used.                                        Each module is described further below.

                                                                  A. Input Module
C. The TrueNorth Environment                                         The input stage provides a copy of the input spikes which
  A TrueNorth Chip [23] consists of a network of 64×64=4096       serve as inputs to the DS neuron module and delay module.
neurosynaptic cores with programmable connectivity, synapses,     The input stage is also used to enforce a refractory period
and neuron parameters. Connectivity between neurons follows       which limits the minimum allowable time between two input
a block-wise scheme. Each core has 256 input axons, with          spikes from the same pixel by blocking the second spike if it
programmable connectivity to any of the 256 neurons in that       falls within τr of the first.
core. Each neuron’s output can be routed to a single axon            A refractory period of τr (ms) is implemented using a
anywhere on the chip. All communications to, from, and within     refractory neuron model (see Table I). When at rest state
chip are performed asynchronously [24].                           (membrane potential of zero), the neuron should fire an output
                                                                  spike as soon as an input spike is received. This is achieved
  Each TrueNorth neurosynaptic core is made of 256 axons,
                                                                  by enforcing
256×256 synapse crossbar and 256 neurons (Fig. 4 A). In this
                                                                                             we + l ≥ Θ                      (1)
paper, the NS1e board was used, containing 4096 cores, 1M +
neurons, 268M + synapses, embedded in a board with a Zynq         where we is the excitatory synaptic weight, l is the leak, and
FPGA containing an ARM-core (Fig. 4 B).                           Θ is the neuron threshold.
                                                                                                                                                                        4



West                                                                                                      from one of the four neighbouring pixels. Thus, the spikes

         ̀x̀y ̀x̀y ̀x ̀y ̀x̀y ̀x ̀y
North                                                                                                     from some pixels serve as input to neighbouring DS neurons
                                                                                 delayed
                                                                                 delayed signal           which reside on different cores. The input stage takes care of
                                                                                                          generating copies of the spikes from these pixels and routing
West                                                                                                      them to the neighbouring cores.
                                                                                                             Each core only sends spikes to its neighbouring cores lying




                                                                                                  Axons
North
                                                                        ﬁltered
                                                                        ﬁltered signal                    to the South and East, and each core receives input spikes from
                                                                                                          its neighbouring cores in the North and West.
ATIS
                                                                                                             The number of neurons required by the input module is
                                      raw signal                                                          therefore
                                       Refractory   Delay                            DS
                                      ̀x̀y ̀x ̀y ̀x̀y ̀x ̀y                         4̀x̀y                             Nin (∆x, ∆y) = ∆x∆y + ∆x + ∆y,                  (4)



                                                                                    DS output
                                                                       Neurons
                                                                                                          where ∆x and ∆y specify the pixel size of the image region
                                         South




                                                        South
                                                 East




                                                                East




                                                                                                          in x and y direction processed by a single core.
                                                                                                             The input module implementing refraction is shown in red
Fig. 5: Arrangement of a TrueNorth core implementing the                                                  in Fig. 5.
motion model. Refractory (red), Delay (Blue), and DS (green)
neurons are shown horizontally along the bottom of the core.
Input axons are shown vertically on the left of the core. Text B. Delay Module
labels indicate the direction inputs are arriving from and outputs    The delay module implements the delay required by the
are routed to. The number of neurons (horizontal axis) and delayed DS neuron inhibitory input. Delays of τd milliseconds
axons (vertical axis) are explicitly indicated for each part of are implemented using the Delay neuron model of Table I.
the model. Shaded regions indicate areas where connections            When at rest (zero membrane potential), then neuron will
(synapses) exist between axons on the left and neurons at the remain at rest until an input spike is received. An input spike
bottom.                                                            will push the membrane potential above zero, and once above
                                                                   zero the neuron membrane potential will leak towards a positive
                                                                   threshold. The delay is implemented by the time taken to leak
   After spiking, the neuron resets to a large negative voltage to the positive threshold. Once the threshold is reached, an
and slowly leaks back to zero, thus implementing a refractory output spike is emitted, and the neuron will be reset back to
period. The desired refractory period is achieved by setting the the rest state.
reset and leak values such that                                       A disadvantage of the second approach is that if two input
                   τr ≈ Vlr                                        spikes arrive from the same pixel at times t1 and t2 such
                                                               (2)
                   Vr = −(2n − 1), n ∈ N                           that t2 − t1 < τd , only a single delayed output spike will be
where τr is the desired refractory period, and Vr is the generated, and the output spike will be generated with delay
reset potential, which can only take on limited values due τd − 1 millseconds after t1 . To avoid such complications, we
to constraints of the chip.                                        use the refractory period from the input stage to limit the
   Input spikes received while the neuron potential is leaking probability of having two spikes occur close together. More
towards zero will not cause an output spike, but they will specifically, we choose τr such that τr > τd .
shorten the refractory period. The actual refractory period           All input spikes from the region covered by the core must be
              0
achieved, τr , is given by:                                        delayed,  and copies of the delayed spikes at the South and East
                                                                   boundaries must be generated for neighbouring cores. Thus
                          τr0 = Vr +wl
                                       es
                                                                   the total number of neurons required for the delay module,
                                                               (3) Ndelay (∆x, ∆y), is
                               = τr + wle s
                                                                              Ndelay (∆x, ∆y) = Nin (∆x, ∆y)
where s is the number of spikes received during the refractory                                                                  (5)
                                                                                                  = ∆x∆y + ∆x + ∆y.
period τr0 . To ensure that the achieved refractory period τr0 is
as close as possible to the desired refractory period, τr , the       The delay module (blue in Fig. 5) receives inputs from
term we s/l must be minimized. The minimum value which the refractory input module (red), as well as input from the
still satisfies constraint (1) occurs when l = 254, we = 255.      refractory input modules of the cores to the North and West.
   Connectivity on TrueNorth is bound by certain constraints, The delay module generates outputs which feed back to the
one of which is that a spike can only be routed to one core. same core, as well as output for use in processing of the cores
This constraint can be overcome by implementing multiple to the South and East.
identical neurons on the same core. Each neuron will then
generate an identical output, thereby providing multiple copies,
each of which can be routed to different cores.                    C. DS Module
   In the case of our TrueNorth model, there are four co-located      The DS module holds the DS neurons. The parameters for
DS neurons at every pixel location, and they each require input each neuron are shown in Table I. There are four DS neurons
                                                                                                                                          5



                    TABLE I: Neuron parameters                           sensitive to motion in the positive x-direction. The velocity
        Parameter          Symbol   Refractory   DS neuron   Delay       can then be calculated using
  excitatory weight (mV)    we         255         150         1                              tx    =   t x+ − t x−
  inhibitory weight (mV)    wi          0           50         0                              ty    =   ty + − ty −
                                                                                                                                        (8)
     threshold (mV)          Θ          1          125        τd                              vx    =   tx /(t2x + t2y )
      leak (mV/ms)           l        −254          −1         1                              vy    =   ty /(t2x + t2y )
   reset potential (mV)     Vr        −τr          127         0
                                                                         where vx and vy indicate the component of velocity in the x
   negative floor (mV)       β        −τr          −50         0
                                                                         and y directions respectively, in units of pixels per millisecond.

per image location, so a core covering an image region of size           F. Self excitatory state
∆x by ∆y pixels will require                                                The output neuron of the DS unit should be self-excitatory
                                                                         until it receives a strong inhibitory spike. This behavior was
                      NDS (∆x, ∆y) = 4∆x∆y                         (6)   achieved by setting the reset potential to be higher than the
                                                                         threshold (αj ). Then, when the membrane potential crosses
neurons.                                                                 once the threshold, the cell enters a self-excitatory state until
  The DS neurons are shown in green in Fig. 5 and receive                a strong inhibition link is received.
input from both the input refractory module, and the delay                  Sometimes, due to noise, the inhibitory spike can be missing.
module of the current core, as well as from the cores to the             To prevent a cell to spike indefinitely, and second strong
North and West.                                                          inhibition spike is generated and delayed (typically 100ms) as
                                                                         the excitation spike is generated.
D. Parameters
                                                                   G. ATIS-TrueNorth link
   TrueNorth neurons are a variant of linear leaky integrate and
                                                                      The ATIS and TrueNorth chips both use variants of the
fire model with 23 tunable parameters, as mentioned in [25].
                                                                   Address Event-Representation (AER) protocol [27]. However,
Table I contains the neuron parameters for each population.
                                                                   the two are not directly compatible, so the Opal Kelly
   The total number of neurons NP required by a core is
                                                                   XEM6010 board with Xilinx Spartan 6 FPGA which powers
     NP (∆x, ∆y) = Nin (∆x, ∆y) + Ndelay (∆x, ∆y)                  and configures ATIS is also used to convert the ATIS AER
                           +NDS (∆x, ∆y)                           signals to TrueNorth AER signals.
                                                                      The ATIS AER data consists of an absolute pixel address
                      = 6∆x∆y + 2∆x + 2∆y                          and  a polarity, all of which are communicated in parallel when
                                                                   the AER request line is active.
     NP (∆x, ∆y) ≤ 256.                                               The TrueNorth AER data consists of a relative core address,
                                                               (7) an axon address, and a 4 bit target time. The data is commu-
   The values ∆X = 6 and ∆Y = 6 maximize the image area nicated in two phases, with half the bits being communicated
processed by the core, subject to the constraint that the core in parallel during each phase.
only has 256 neurons. The number of axons used is less than           The TrueNorth reset and 1kHz clock tick signals are shared
the number of neurons, so neurons are the limiting factor.         with  the Opal Kelly board so that it can keep track of the state
   285 identity cores are used to relay the ATIS input to the      of TrueNorth’s      internal 4 bit time. All events are communicated
motion model (see Section III-G). For the motion model to          to TrueNorth      with  a target time 2ms later than the current time.
cover the 304×240 pixel input image requires another 304/6 ×          A   one   to   one   mapping     from ATIS pixels to TrueNorth
240/6 ≈ 51 × 40 = 2040 cores. In total the TrueNorth model         neurons    is generated     such   that  each TrueNorth core accepts
uses 2040 + 285 = 2325 cores to compute motion at all              events  from    a  16×16    pixel region,   with polarity being ignored.
locations in the input image space. 240 neurons are used           An  array   of  19×15     =  285  identity   cores is instantiated at the
per core (a usage of 256 neurons per core is achievable if         physical   core   locations   targetted   by  the ATIS interface. These
∆X = 18 and ∆Y = 2, but each core would still only be              identity  cores   generate   a copy   of the  spikes they receive, which
processing 36 pixels, and thus such an arrangement is less         can  then   be  routed   to  the rest  of  the TrueNorth model.
efficient).                                                           This   interface    arrangement      uses   an extra 285 cores, but
                                                                   allows the model to be rapidly changed by only reconfiguring
                                                                   TrueNorth, instead of having to reprogram the ATIS FPGA
E. Interpreting the Result                                         to target different cores and neurons for different TrueNorth
                                                                   models.
   To interpret the output spikes from the network at a particular
pixel location, the outputs of all four of the DS neurons
                                                                                                  IV. T ESTING
located at the pixel are combined. The same input spike will
excite all four DS neurons, so they should all start bursting A. Sources of Visual Data
simultaneously (unless they are already inhibited). We use the        Two sources of visual data are used in this work: a recording
notation tx+ to denote the length of the burst from the neuron of a black pipe rotating in front of a white background,
                                                                                                                                        6



                        x                                            using
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                         cos (tωt ) − sin (tωt )
     a)                             b)                                        R(t)                =
                                                                                                          sin (tωt ) cos (tωt )
                                                                                                                  w
                                                                                                         xc         ±2
                                                                              Location(l, t)      =         + R(t)
                                                                                                         yc          l
                                                                                                        
 y                                                                            Direction(t, l)     =
                                                                                                              tωt     l≤0
                                                                                                                                      (9)
                                                                                                            tωt + π   l>0

                                                                              Speed(l)            = |l|ωt

                                                                              l              ∈ [−150, 150]
                                                                              t              ∈ [0, |ωπt | ]
                                                                              ωt = 2.21rad/s
                                                                     where R(t) is a rotation matrix which varies with time (t) to
     c)                             d)                               model rotation of the pipe, ωt is the angular velocity of the
                                                                     pipe, Location(l, t) gives the pixel location, [x, y]T , of points
                                                                     on the pipe as a function of time, their position on the edge of
                                                                     the pipe l, and the location of the center of the pipe [xc , yc ]T .
                                                                     The speed of each point is dependent only on its position on
                                                                     the pipe l, while the direction depends on t and l because one
                                                                     half of the pipe is moving in the opposite direction to the other.
                                                                     The pipe has a finite length of 300 pixels, thereby limiting l.
                                                                     The recording is long enough for half a rotation of the pipe,
                                                                     thereby limiting t. The speed and direction given by (9) are
                                                                     the components perpendicular to the edges of the pipe. The
                                                                     direction of the x and y axes are shown top left of Fig. 6.

                                                                     C. Modelling Motion for the Rotating Spiral
                                                                        The spiral stimulus does not exhibit the same symmetry as
Fig. 6: The two recordings used in this paper. (a) and (b)           the pipe, so we use a recording of a full rotation of the spiral,
show images of a rotating pipe and spiral respectively from the      which takes 0.5 seconds. The shape of the spiral stimulus was
sensor’s viewpoint. The direction of rotation is shown by the        parameterized by angle with a variable θ0 from which the
green arrows inset. (c) and (d) show 10ms each of the pipe and       speed, direction, and location of motion can be modelled using
spiral recordings. Red points indicate OFF-events (decreases
in intensity) while blue points indicate ON-events (increases                                      θ0

in intensity). Axes directions used in (9) and (10) are shown            r(θ0 )                =2π
in the top left.                                                                                                            
                                                                                                  xc   r(θ0 ) cos (−θ0 + tωt )
                                                                         Location(θ0 , t)      =     +
                                                                                                  yc   r(θ0 ) sin (−θ0 + tωt )
originally presented in [19], and a recording of a rotating spiral                                 θ0
                                                                                                        ln 2       1
[14]. The pipe and spiral sequences are both ATIS recordings             Speed(θ0 , t)         =2π       π ωt cos ( πω
                                                                                                                    ln 2
                                                                                                                         )
                                                                                                                       t
in which ground truth for motion can be predicted to quantify
the accuracy of the output. The pipe and spiral recordings are                                                     ln 2
                                                                         Direction(θ0 , t)     = −θ0 + tωt + sin ( πω t
                                                                                                                        )
shown in Fig. 6. This motion is modelled as described below.
                                                                         θ0                    ∈ [0, 20]
                                                                         t                     ∈ [0, |ωπt |]
B. Modelling Motion for the Rotating Pipe                                ωt                    = −12.57rad/s
                                                                                                                                     (10)
  We use a recording of just over half rotation of the pipe             where r(θ0 ) is the radial distance to the spiral from the center,
due to symmetry (the second half of the rotation will look           [x0 , y0 ]T . Location(θ0 , t) describes the [x, y]T location of the
almost identical to the first). A full rotation takes roughly 2.85   spiral edges. Speed(θ0 , t) and Direction(θ0 , t) give the speed
seconds, so we use a 1.5 second recording. The rotating pipe         and direction of motion respectively. The Cosine and Sine
was modelled as having two parallel edges spaced a width of          terms in the speed and direction equations account for the fact
w apart from each other and rotating about a point centered          that the spiral is not perpendicular to the radial vector (second
between them. Motion of the pipe could then be modelled              term in Location(θ0 , t)).
                                                                                                                                                                   7




                                                                                                                                           180
                                                           350

                                                                                                                                           160
                                                                                       20
                                                           300
                                                                                                                                           140
   0.6                                                                                 40
                                                           250
                                                                                                                                           120
   0.5
                                                                                       60




                                                                 angle (degrees)




                                                                                                                                                 error (degrees)
                                                           200                                                                             100
   0.4
                                                                                       80
                                                                                                                                           80
   0.3                                                     150

                                                                                      100                                                  60
   0.2
                                                           100
                                                     200                                                                                   40
   0.1                                                                                120
                                                           50
                                               100                                                                                         20
     0                                                                                140
   150
              100                                          0                                                                               0
                          50              0                                                 0           50             100        150
                                      0



Fig. 7: 3D representation of network result on the Spiral data.                                                  (a)
The direction of movement is color-coded in the HSV space.
Some individual isolated spikes are flow estimates generated                                                                               350

in response to sensor noise. Video available online [28].                              20
                                                                                                                                           300

                                                                                       40
                                                                                                                                           250
                          V. R ESULTS
                                                                                       60




                                                                                                                                                 angle (degrees)
   Output spikes are sent from the board as UDP packets. A                                                                                 200

simple UDP receiver code for visualizing the output spikes                             80
was developed that captures UDP packets, decodes them and                                                                                  150

plots the results of the flow (direction and velocity).                               100
                                                                                                                                           100
   The implemented network, as presented in Section III, uses
                                                                                      120
∆X = 6 and ∆Y = 6, leading to a use of 2325 cores, 558000                                                                                  50
neurons. Feeding this network with input from a rotating spiral,                      140
as shown in Fig. 6, gives results shown in Fig. 7. The estimated                                                                           0
                                                                                            0           50             100        150
direction of movment is color-coded in the HSV space. Fig. 8
shows the estimated error for this network. Here, the proposed
approach is able to extract the direction of movement with                                                       (b)
an absolute error mean of ¯ ' 8.5 deg. This error is mainly                       Fig. 8: Rotating spiral. a) Absolute error. One can notice that
located at the end of the edges, where no neighborhood is                          the error is mainly located at the end of edges, due to the lack
available, thus given wrong measurements.                                          of adjacent active pixels. In some extend, it is impossible to
   Fig. 7 shows a 3D representation of the optical flow estimates                  compute a flow here. b) Top view of the output of the network.
arising from the spiral data. Fig. 8 shows the angular error for
the same spiral recording. Fig. 9 shows the average endpoint
error for the spiral data. A video of the spiral result is available               chips, or only computing optical flow at every second pixel in
online at [28].                                                                    the x and y directions.
   Fig. 10 shows similar angular error for the pipe data. A
                                                                                      Of the 256 neurons available on each TrueNorth core, 16
video of the pipe results can be found online at [29].
                                                                                   are unused. Of the 240 remaining neurons, 24 (10%) are
   Fig. 11 shows a snapshot of the output from data captured                       used to copy spike signals across the core boundaries to
with the sensor hand held in the lab. A video of this data is                      prevent motion estimation artifacts at the core boundary. Since
available online at [30].                                                          copying the signal across the core boundary introduces a 1
                                                                                   tick delay, the inputs to each core must also be delayed 1
                        VI. D ISCUSSION                                            tick before processing, which uses another 6×6=36 of the
   The model presented here is capable of estimating visual                        240 used neurons. The block connectivity of TrueNorth has
motion in real-time with good accuracy, but there are some                         many advantages for parallelizing local computations in each
limitations.                                                                       core, but at the cost of requiring spikes to be copied between
   The method described uses 57% of the cores available on                         neighbouring blocks, which ends up using 36+16 = 52 neurons
TrueNorth to estimate optical flow at every pixel over the full                    per core.
ATIS resolution of 304×240. To extend the method to operate                           Another constraint is imposed by the time resolution of
at higher resolutions, such as the prototype 640×480 pixel                         TrueNorth, which is operating at a 1ms tick interval. This
DAVIS sensor, would require either using multiple TrueNorth                        time quantization results in each DS unit’s output speeds being
                                                                                                                                                   8




                                                                                                                           180
                                                                        0
                                                                                                                           160

    100                                                                                                                    140
                                                                       50

     50                                                                                                                    120




                                                                                                                                 error (degrees)
                                                                      100
      0                                                                                                                    100

    150
                                                                                                                           80
                                                                      150
                                                                                                                           60
          100

                                                                      200                                                  40
                                                          150
                50                                                                                                         20
                                              100
                                                                      250
                                   50                                                                                      0
                                                                               50     100    150         200   250   300
                     0
                         0


                                                                                                   (a)
Fig. 9: Average Endpoint Error (AEE) for the spiral input.
Our network is able to reconstruct the velocity vector with
                                                                                                                           350
an average error of 11%, error which is mainly located at the           0

edges of the spiral, where it is impossible to now the speed                                                               300
by our method.                                                         50
                                                                                                                           250




                                                                                                                                 angle (degrees)
                                                                      100
quantized to 1/n, n ∈ N pixels/ms. Such quantization can result                                                            200

in large error for large speeds (since the quantized bins are
                                                                                                                           150
further apart at high speed), and speeds faster than 1 pixel/ms       150

will be detected as 0.                                                                                                     100
   The maximum detectable speed could be increased by                 200
placing DS input pixels further apart. A spacing of k pixels                                                               50

between the DS unit input pixels would result in a maximum
                                                                      250
possible speed of k pixels/ms. However, this approach would                     50    100    150     200    250    300
                                                                                                                           0

aggravate the edge correspondence problem, because it becomes
less likely that the two pixels are seeing the same edge. Another
                                                                                                 (b)
possible method for increasing the maximum detectable speed is
to reduce the tick period for TrueNorth. While this is definitely Fig. 10: Rotating pipe. a) Absolute error. One can notice that
possible, a maximum speed of 1 pixel/ms was deemed good the error is mainly located at the end of edges, due to the lack
enough and reducing the tick period of TrueNorth was not of adjacent active pixels. In some extend, it is impossible to
explored further.                                                 compute a flow here. b) Top view of the output of the network.
   The slowest speed which can be detected is 1/τr , set by the Video available online [29].
length of the delay, τr . Increasing the spacing of DS pixels to
k would also increase this minimum detectable speed to k/τr .
   There is a tradeoff between the slowest detectable stimulus, spikes than fast moving edges. An isolated noise event at a
and the minimum allowable time between two subsequent single pixel is a particularly bad culprit for generating spikes
stimuli. For two nearby, fast moving stimuli to each be uniquely since it will simultaneously activate all four 4 DS units located
detected and measured, their onsets must be spaced as least τr at that pixel, and each of these DS units will generate a train
ms apart. Thus for fast moving stimuli it is desirable to have of τr spikes before self-inhibiting.
τr be small, but for slow stimuli, we require τr to be large.       If too many output spikes are generated, the TrueNorth
   Spike IO bandwidth of the TrueNorth chip also poses a chip tick period will extend to allow time for the spikes
constraint. The TrueNorth chip has four spike IO ports (North to be communicated, which will distort the estimated flow
South East West), each capable of 40k spikes per millisecond. (which assumes a 1ms tick). In the case where pre-recorded
On the NS1e development platform used in this work, all data is being run through the model (instead of live ATIS
outputs spikes are communicated to a Xilinx Zynq through data), the TrueNorth Neurosynaptic System will input spikes in
one port. Although 40k spikes/ms is a lot, the model presented accordance with the slowed down tick, thereby still allowing
in this paper does generate a lot of output spikes. The worst the model to estimate speeds accurately, but the system will
case scenario happens in complex scenes with lots of slowly run slower than real-time. On-chip spike communication is
moving edges. Edge density increases the number of DS units much faster than off-chip spike communication, so in future a
which respond, while slow moving edges generate a lot more method which interprets velocity on-chip and more efficiently
                                                                                                                                                     9




                                             Left      Up        Right       Down         Left    7       15       30       60       120       250
                                                              Direction                                        Speed (pixels/second)
Fig. 11: Snapshot from a video showing optical flow output from TrueNorth for data captured while moving the ATIS sensor
by hand in the lab. The leftmost image shows the scene from a similar angle captured using a cellphone camera. The middle
shows the direction of motion detected, and the right shows the speed. Strong vertical and horizontal edges come out clearly,
but the direction of motion differs because the network estimates the normal component of optical flow.


communicates the results off-chip can help to mitigate the IO                                    ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
constraint.
                                                                        This work was partially achieved during the 22nd edition of
   The model described in this paper can be classified as a
                                                                     the Telluride neuromorphic workshop in Telluride, Colorado,
token based method, where a token is generated whenever
                                                                     2016. The authors would like to thank the organizers and
an edge passes over a pixel. The actual gradient of the edge
                                                                     all the staff of this workshop for the fruitful discussions and
is never estimated, the gradient just has to be large enough
                                                                     exchanges that took place there.
to trigger a spike from the ATIS pixel. Large gradients may
result in multiple spikes in response to a single edge, but
the refractory period of the first stage will eliminate these                                         R EFERENCES
secondary spikes. Much like many other event-based optical            [1] M. Joesch, B. Schnell, S. V. Raghu, D. F. Reiff, and A. Borst, “On and
flow methods [13], [15], [20], this method only estimates flow            off pathways in drosophila motion vision,” Nature, vol. 468, no. 7321,
at edges, and it estimates normal flow (optical flow normal               p. 300, 2010.
                                                                      [2] A. B. Watson and A. J. Ahumada Jr, “A look at motion in the frequency
to the edge direction). However, some event-based methods                 domain,” 1983.
do estimate gradients for use in optical flow computation [15],       [3] D. J. Heeger, “Model for the extraction of image flow,” JOSA A, vol. 4,
or use global constraints to estimate optical flow for image              no. 8, pp. 1455–1471, 1987.
                                                                      [4] I. Barron, “D.. i. fleet, and ss beauchemin, performance of optical flow
regions where little or no gradient is present [16].                      techniques,” International Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 12, no. 2,
   Currently the output spike signals must be interpreted off             1994.
chip to extract the velocity information. Since 43% of the            [5] M. Sutton, W. Wolters, W. Peters, W. Ranson, and S. McNeill, “Deter-
                                                                          mination of displacements using an improved digital correlation method,”
TrueNorth cores are unused, there remains room to develop                 Image and vision computing, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 133–139, 1983.
on-chip interpretation of the spikes to extract velocity. However,    [6] L. Alvarez, J. Sánchez, and J. Weickert, “A scale-space approach to
the output of the TrueNorth chip is always in spiking format,             nonlocal optical flow calculations,” in International conference on scale-
                                                                          space theories in computer vision. Springer, 1999, pp. 235–246.
so such development work would simplify, but not eliminate,           [7] A. Dosovitskiy, P. Fischer, E. Ilg, P. Hausser, C. Hazirbas, V. Golkov,
the off-chip velocity extraction.                                         P. van der Smagt, D. Cremers, and T. Brox, “Flownet: Learning
                                                                          optical flow with convolutional networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
                                                                          International Conference on Computer Vision, 2015, pp. 2758–2766.
                      VII. C ONCLUSION                                [8] D. Honegger, L. Meier, P. Tanskanen, and M. Pollefeys, “An open source
                                                                          and open hardware embedded metric optical flow cmos camera for indoor
   A SNN method for normal optical flow computation from                  and outdoor applications,” in Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2013
silicon retina data has been proposed. The method is capable              IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2013, pp. 1736–1741.
                                                                      [9] J. Y. Lettvin, H. R. Maturana, W. S. McCulloch, and W. H. Pitts, “What
of measuring the speed of edges in the range of 1/50 pixels/ms            the frog’s eye tells the frog’s brain,” Proceedings of the IRE, vol. 47,
to 1 pixel/ms in real time. The light signal coming into the              no. 11, pp. 1940–1951, 1959.
vision sensor is transduced into spikes by a silicon retina. These   [10] H. B. Barlow and W. R. Levick, “The mechanism of directionally selective
spikes are then fed into the SNN for processing, which provides           units in rabbit’s retina.” The Journal of physiology, vol. 178, no. 3, p.
                                                                          477, 1965.
an output estimate also encoded as spikes. This network,             [11] J. Tanner and C. Mead, “An integrated analog optical motion sensor,”
consuming 80mW (70mW for TrueNorth, 10mW for the                          1986.
ATIS, omitting FPGA used for communication, which can be             [12] T. Delbrück, “Silicon retina with correlation-based, velocity-tuned pixels,”
                                                                          IEEE Trans. on Neural Networks, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 529–541, May 1993.
removed for targetted applications), running real time and using     [13] R. Benosman, S.-H. Ieng, C. Clercq, C. Bartolozzi, and M. Srinivasan,
2325 cores, 558000 neurons, is able to extract optical flow with          “Asynchronous frameless event-based optical flow,” Neural Networks,
both a low angular error rate below 10 degrees, and Average               vol. 27, pp. 32–37, 2012.
                                                                     [14] G. Orchard and R. Etienne-Cummings, “Bioinspired visual motion
Enpoint Error (AEE [31]) of 11%, for a density estimation of              estimation,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 102, no. 10, pp. 1520–1536,
51%.                                                                      2014.
                                                                                                                                                                  10



[15] F. Barranco, C. Fermüller, and Y. Aloimonos, “Contour motion estimation                                  Andrew Cassidy (M97) received the M.S. degree in
     for asynchronous event-driven cameras,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol.                                     electrical and computer engineering from Carnegie
     102, no. 10, pp. 1537–1556, 2014.                                                                         Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, in 2003,
[16] P. Bardow, A. J. Davison, and S. Leutenegger, “Simultaneous optical                                       and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer en-
     flow and intensity estimation from an event camera,” in Proceedings                                       gineering from Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
     of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,                                        MD, USA, in 2010.
     2016, pp. 884–892.                                                                                           He is a Research Staff Member in the Brain-
[17] T. Brosch and H. Neumann, “Event-based optical flow on neuromorphic                                       Inspired Computing group at IBM ResearchAlmaden,
     hardware,” in proceedings of the 9th EAI International Conference on                                      San Jose, CA, USA. He was one of the lead
     Bio-inspired Information and Communications Technologies (formerly                                        researchers in developing the TrueNorth neurosy-
     BIONETICS) on 9th EAI International Conference on Bio-inspired                                            naptic processor, as a part of the DARPA SyNAPSE
     Information and Communications Technologies (formerly BIONETICS).               program. His expertise is in non-traditional computer architecture, and he is
     ICST (Institute for Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics and Telecom-          experienced in architectural optimization, design, and implementation, particu-
     munications Engineering), 2016, pp. 551–558.                                    larly for machine learning algorithms and cognitive computing applications. He
[18] C. Richter, F. Rhrbein, and J. Conradt, “Bio-inspired optic flow detection      has authored over 30 publications in international journals and conferences.
     using neuromorphic hardware,” 2014, poster.
[19] G. Orchard, R. Benosman, R. Etienne-Cummings, and N. V. Thakor,
     “A spiking neural network architecture for visual motion estimation,”
     in Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference (BioCAS), 2013 IEEE.
     IEEE, 2013, pp. 298–301.
[20] M. Giulioni, X. Lagorce, F. Galluppi, and R. B. Benosman, “Event-based
     computation of motion flow on a neuromorphic analog neural platform,”
     Frontiers in neuroscience, vol. 10, 2016.
[21] C. Posch, T. Serrano-Gotarredona, B. Linares-Barranco, and T. Delbruck,
     “Retinomorphic event-based vision sensors: bioinspired cameras with
     spiking output,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 102, no. 10, pp. 1470–
     1484, 2014.
[22] C. Posch, D. Matolin, and R. Wohlgenannt, “A QVGA 143 dB dynamic
     range frame-free PWM image sensor with lossless pixel-level video
     compression and time-domain CDS,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits,                                  Rodrigo Alvarez-Icaza is a Research Staff Member
     vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 259–275, Jan 2011.                                                                   in the Brain-Inspired Computing group at IBM
[23] P. A. Merolla, J. V. Arthur, R. Alvarez-Icaza, A. S. Cassidy, J. Sawada,                                 Research Almaden where he was one of the lead
     F. Akopyan, B. L. Jackson, N. Imam, C. Guo, Y. Nakamura et al., “A                                       developers of the TrueNorth processor. He has a Ph.D.
     million spiking-neuron integrated circuit with a scalable communication                                  degree in Bioengineering from Stanford University
     network and interface,” Science, vol. 345, no. 6197, pp. 668–673, 2014.                                  (2011) and a M.S. degree in Bioengineering from the
[24] P. Merolla, R. Appuswamy, J. Arthur, S. K. Esser, and D. Modha, “Deep                                    University of Pennsylvania (2006). His research inter-
     neural networks are robust to weight binarization and other non-linear                                   ests are focused on brain-inspired system architecture
     distortions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01981, 2016.                                                     and their application on real-time control systems
[25] A. S. Cassidy, P. Merolla, J. V. Arthur, S. K. Esser, B. Jackson, R. Alvarez-                            and robotics. He has authored over 40 patents and
     Icaza, P. Datta, J. Sawada, T. M. Wong, V. Feldman et al., “Cognitive                                    publications in international journals and conferences.
     computing building block: A versatile and efficient digital neuron
     model for neurosynaptic cores,” in Neural Networks (IJCNN), The 2013
     International Joint Conference on. IEEE, 2013, pp. 1–10.
[26] A. Amir, P. Datta, W. P. Risk, A. S. Cassidy, J. A. Kusnitz, S. K.
     Esser, A. Andreopoulos, T. M. Wong, M. Flickner, R. Alvarez-Icaza
     et al., “Cognitive computing programming paradigm: a corelet language
     for composing networks of neurosynaptic cores,” in Neural Networks
     (IJCNN), The 2013 International Joint Conference on. IEEE, 2013, pp.
     1–10.
[27] K. Boahen, “Point-to-point connectivity between neuromorphic chips
     using address events,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II Analog Digit. Signal
     Process., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 416–434, may 2000.
[28] [Video]. (2017) Spiral optical flow result. [Online]. Available:
     https://youtu.be/Nt9tlMyv2 Q                                                                              Ryad Benosman received the M.Sc. and Ph.D.
[29] ——. (2017) Pipe optical flow result. [Online]. Available: https:                                          degrees in applied mathematics and robotics from
     //youtu.be/cjtPA0-tAEE                                                                                    University Pierre and Marie Curie in 1994 and 1999,
[30] ——. (2017) Lab scene optical flow result. [Online]. Available:                                            respectively. He is Associate Professor with Univer-
     https://youtu.be/tTk1GbV7-9w                                                                              sity Pierre and Marie Curie, Paris, France, leading
[31] S. Baker, D. Scharstein, J. Lewis, S. Roth, M. J. Black, and R. Szeliski,                                 the Natural Computation and Neuromorphic Vision
     “A database and evaluation methodology for optical flow,” International                                   Laboratory, Vision Institute, Paris. His work covers
     Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 92, no. 1, pp. 1–31, 2011.                                               neuromorphic visual computation and sensing. He
                                                                                                               is currently involved in the French retina prosthetics
                                                                                                               project and in the development of retina implants
                                                                                                               and cofounder of Pixium Vision a french prosthetics
                                                                                     company. He is an expert in complex perception systems, which embraces the
                                                                                     conception, design, and use of different vision sensors covering omnidirectional
                          Germain Haessig received the B.Sc. and the Agr-            360 degree wide-field of view cameras, variant scale sensors, and non-central
                          gation degree in electrical engineering from Ecole         sensors. He is among the pioneers of the domain of omni- directional vision
                          Normale Superieure de Cachan (2012, 2014), and             and unusual cameras and still active in this domain. He has been involved
                          the M.Sc degree in advanced systems and robotics           in several national and European robotics projects, mainly in the design of
                          from University Pierre and Marie Curie (2015). He          artifcial visual loops and sensors. His current research interests include the
                          is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in neurally         understanding of the computation operated along the visual systems areas
                          inspired hardware systems and sensors within the           and establishing a link between computational and biological vision. Ryad
                          Vision Institute, Paris.                                   Benosman has authored more than 100 scientific publications and holds several
                                                                                     patents in the area of vision, robotics and image sensing. In 2013 he was
                                                                                     awarded with the national best French scientific paper by the publication La
                                                                                     Recherche for his work on neuromorphic retinas.
                                                                                  11



                          Garrick Orchard is a Senior Research Scientist at
                          Temasek Laboratories and the Singapore Institute
                          for Neurotechnology (SINAPSE) at the National
                          University of Singapore. He holds a B.Sc. degree
                          (with honours, 2006) in electrical engineering from
                          the University of Cape Town, South Africa and M.S.E.
                          (2009) and Ph.D. (2012) degrees in electrical and
                          computer engineering from Johns Hopkins University,
                          Baltimore, USA. He was named a Paul V. Renoff
                          fellow in 2007, a Virginia and Edward M. Wysocki
                          Sr. fellow in 2011, and a Temasek Research Fellow
in 2015. He received the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Labs
Hart Prize for Best Research and Development Project, and won the best live
demonstration prize at the IEEE Biomedical Circuits and Systems conference
2012. His research focuses on developing neuromorphic vision algorithms and
systems for real-time sensing on mobile platforms. His other research interests
include mixed-signal very large scale integration (VLSI) design, compressive
sensing, spiking neural networks, visual perception, and legged locomotion.
