                                                  T RAINING FOR TEMPORAL SPARSITY IN DEEP NEURAL
                                                     NETWORKS , APPLICATION IN VIDEO PROCESSING

                                                                                               A P REPRINT


                                                               Amirreza Yousefzadeh                                   Manolis Sifalakis
                                                         Amirreza.Yousefzadeh@imec.nl                           Manolis.Sifalakis@imec.nl
arXiv:2107.07305v1 [cs.CV] 15 Jul 2021




                                                                                               July 16, 2021

                                                                                              A BSTRACT
                                                  Activation sparsity improves compute efficiency and resource utilization in sparsity-aware neural
                                                  network accelerators. As the predominant operation in DNNs is multiply-accumulate (MAC) of
                                                  activations with weights to compute inner products, skipping operations where (at least) one of
                                                  the two operands is zero can make inference more efficient in terms of latency and power. Spatial
                                                  sparsification of activations is a popular topic in DNN literature and several methods have already
                                                  been established to bias a DNN for it (e.g. regularization, quantization, boxing, etc). On the other
                                                  hand, temporal sparsity is an inherent feature of bio-inspired spiking neural networks (SNNs), which
                                                  neuromorphic processing exploits for hardware efficiency. Introducing and exploiting spatio-temporal
                                                  sparsity, is a topic much less explored in DNN literature, but in perfect resonance with the trend
                                                  in DNN, to shift from static signal processing (e.g. image processing) to more streaming signal
                                                  processing (e.g. video and audio).
                                                  Towards this goal, in this paper we introduce a new DNN layer (called Delta Activation Layer), whose
                                                  sole purpose is to promote temporal sparsity of activations during training. A Delta Activation Layer
                                                  casts temporal sparsity into spatial activation sparsity to be exploited when performing sparse tensor
                                                  multiplications in hardware. By employing delta inference and “the usual” spatial sparsification
                                                  heuristics during training, the resulting model learns to exploit not only spatial but also temporal
                                                  activation sparsity (for a given input data distribution). One may use the Delta Activation Layer either
                                                  during vanilla training or during a refinement phase.
                                                  We have implemented Delta Activation Layer as an extension of the standard Tensoflow-Keras (2.0)
                                                  library, and applied it to train deep neural networks on the Human Action Recognition (UCF101)
                                                  dataset. We report an almost 3x improvement of activation sparsity, with recoverable loss of model
                                                  accuracy after longer training.
                                                  For reproducibility of the results we have made available the source for the Delta Activation Layer at
                                                  https://github.com/msifalakis/delta_activation_layer.


                                         1   Introduction

                                         As the depth, size, and complexity of neural network models increases, training but also inference is becoming
                                         increasingly more expensive in terms of resources to perform, often even on tailor-made accelerator platforms.
                                         Therefore, model compression and efficiently compressed inference processing has became very important in DNN
                                         literature [Sze et al., 2017]; and over years, several strategies and solutions have been proposed for reducing the memory
                                         and compute requirements of DNN models.
                                         By training with sparsity penalties, and/or employing clever quantization, and network pruning heuristics, e.g. [Han
                                         et al., 2016a] [Gale et al., 2019], it is possible to reduce the network size, so as to consume less memory and perform
                                         less operations, with often unsubstantial loss (or even improvement) of accuracy. Likewise, by employing dual-training
                                         of teacher and student models[Hinton et al., 2015], it has been shown possible to produce very compact and stable
                                         (student) inference models that even generalize better (than the teacher).
                                                         arXiv Template                                                A P REPRINT



In all these approaches and strategies, sparsity is paramount as sparse tensors are not only easier to store and access in
memory, but can also be (under conditions) more efficient to process. In practical reality, performing sparse operations
on parallelizing accelerators often accounts a little extra effort per operation due to the fact that the resulting irregularity
of computation cannot be optimally distributed across the parallel cores. In this case if the sparsity level is not sufficiently
high, executing sparse operations in off-the-shelf accelerators will even be less efficient1 .
Interestingly, as the competition for tera-operations (TOPS) per Watt in the DNN accelerator architectures has become
less relevant over time [Sze et al., 2020], the focus of academic research in DNN accelerator and architectures has
shifted towards sparsity exploitation in memory and compute operations [Albericio et al., 2016] [Han et al., 2016b]
[Parashar et al., 2017] [Aimar et al., 2018] [Kepner et al., 2020]. This resulted in the new terminology of “effective
TOPS"2 . Besides academic research, several start-ups are developing commercial versions of sparsity exploiting neural
network inference processors [Moreira et al., 2020] [Demler, 2019]. Finally, recently the new NVIDIA GPU A100
architecture was released with features to exploit fine-grained sparsity in deep learning networks, which doubles the
throughput of Tensor Core operations."[Choquette and Gandhi, 2020].
Unlike structural (weight) sparsity and spatial (activation) sparsity, discussed so far, which are hot topics in DNN
literature [Wen et al., 2016], there is also temporal activation sparsity, which is less explored in the context of DNN, yet
rather popular theme in signal processing (compressed sensing), and neuromorphic computing. By definition, temporal
sparsity exists in a signal which is not changing over time. Fig. 1 (a) shows evolution of a signal f (t) over time. For
processing this signal in DNN, it is sampled in a fixed periodic time-steps and every sample is processed separately.
Since some of the samples in time may be redundant, their processing can be safely skipped, as shown in Fig. 1 (b). Fig.
1 (c) and (d) shows the same concept in a two dimensional signal (sequence of video frames). And since processing of
temporal signals maps to the same linear algebra operations as typical of DNNs, temporal sparsity can also lead to
skip processing of zeros in sparse matrix operations sparing redundant operations. Unsurprisingly as streaming and
sequence data applications (for example real-time video/audio processing) have become mainstream in DNNs, interest
in exploiting temporal sparsity is relevant and slowly growing. The questions we would like to answers in this paper
are 1) how it is possible to exploit temporal sparsity in a DNN, 2) how much sparsity can be added when exploiting
temporal sparsity on top of the spatial sparsity and 3) what are the consequences of this technique (disadvantages).




Figure 1: (a) Concept of temporal sparsity in a signal, (b) temporally sparse processing, (c) Sequence of 2D images in
time from a video, (d) Temporally sparse processing of video frames. Images are taken from [Benosman, 2018]

In compressed sensing, temporal sparsity is used in signal compression for efficient use of memory and communication
bandwidth. As natural signals are inherently sparse in time (low information density), most video/audio stream

    1
      For example sparsity less than 98% in NVIDIA V100 GPU when using NVIDIA cuSPARSE library results in less processing
throughput than dense execution [Gale et al., 2020]
    2
      Effective TOPS refers to the equivalent amount of TOPS when the sparsity is not taken into account. For an accelerator that can
exploit sparsity, effective TOPS is higher than its actual TOPS.


                                                                 2
                                                          arXiv Template                                                 A P REPRINT



recordings contain too much redundant information. Video/Audio compression algorithms exploiting the spatio-
temporal sparsity in these signals can easily achieve a compression factor of 100x to 1000x [Richardson, 2004].
More pertinent to the field of deep learning and machine learning (ML), neuromorphic computing exploits spatio-
temporal sparsity as one of the key biology motivated principles of neural processing, for engineering hardware efficient
algorithms and scalable, energy efficient, processing architectures. Unlike DNN accelerators, a design tenet of Spiking
Neural Network accelerators [Furber et al., 2014] [Davies et al., 2018] [Akopyan et al., 2015] has always been to
perform efficient sparse operations; as a consequence of the very degree of temporal sparsity in the activations of
spiking neurons.
Motivated by neuromorphic compute-platform engineering, we present here a simplified methodology for inducing
temporal sparsity to any DNN, by means of a new activation layer (called Delta Activation Layer), that can be introduced
in a DNN at any phase (training, refinement, or inference only). A Delta Activation Layer contains rather simple
stateful neurons that remember past activations and quantize-propagate only changes in activations over time. While it
functions similar to delta-inference [Neil et al., 2017] or sigma-delta networks [O’Connor and Welling, 2017], there
is however no threshold [Neil et al., 2017] or PID parameters [O’Connor and Welling, 2017] to be learned. Instead a
generic activation quantization method is used that can easily integrate most existing or emerging quantization methods,
e.g. [Yang et al., 2020] [Jin et al., 2020]. This extensibility is motivated by the desire to choose quantization method
based on the accuracy trade-off it provides. During training of a DNN, the Delta Activation Layer adds sparsity penalty
to the overall cost function of the DNN together with a proper gradient to automatically optimize the quantization level
for the best sparsity-accuracy balance. In this sense, the attained accuracy is equivalent to that of a quantized DNN.
This Delta Activation Layer can be introduced in all or some of the DNN layers as deemed beneficial.
In the remaining of this paper, we explain the Delta Activation Layer in more detail and present the results of experiments
with ResNet-50 and the UCF101 dataset. We also relate this work to previous literature and discuss current limitations
of the Delta Activation Layer and the future directions.

1.1       Related Work

Arguably, exploitation of (spatio-)temporal activation sparsity in neural network processing has origins in neuromorphic
research [Linares-Barranco, 2006], and more recently it has become a hot-topic in mainstream DNN literature3 .
In [Wu et al., 2018], the authors defend the use of compressed videos (using H.264, HVEC, etc.) directly as inputs to
a DNN, by conjecturing that the higher information density of compressed video frames compared to “raw” frames,
makes training easier and inference faster. The type of video compression they consider account for both spatial sparsity
(in base I-frames) as well as temporal sparsity (optical flow in P-frames). While effective, this method only considers
temporal sparsity in the input layer (P-frames of compressed video). In addition to that our results show that temporal
sparsity can also be very high and beneficial when going deeper into the neural network, where higher-level features are
extracted.
In [Buckler et al., 2018], the authors propose a novel DNN inference algorithm (AMS) alongside a DNN accelerator
optimized for video-based inference. Inspired by video compression methods the algorithm skips the processing of
invariant information across input frames (temporal sparsity), and also largely reduces the processing of motion-related
features in the input; by using optical flow information from P-frames to do motion compensation directly on the
activation maps of previous frames. In this way large parts of the neural network “hybernates“ (as opposed of computing
new activation maps for every frame) for more of the inputs. The AMS algorithm is integratable in any video-processing
CNN model/pipeline through an “extension” DNN accelerator on top of any existing CNN accelerator, and improves
efficiency by a factor of two. This is analogous to the functioning of our Delta Activation Layer. Also similar to our
method, AMS is required to keep track of the neurons’ activation state to exploit temporal sparsity.
In delta networks [Neil et al., 2017], which are motivated by neuromorphic engineering in RNNs, and sigma-delta
quantized neural networks [O’Connor and Welling, 2017], which relate to herding [Welling, 2009] in Markov random
fields, each neuron only processes input signal changes between successive timesteps, thus exploiting temporal sparsity
at any layer depth. In delta-networks [Neil et al., 2017] a signal change is propagated downstream only when a certain
threshold is exceeded (thereby encouraging further sparsity). By analogy in sigma-delta networks [O’Connor and
Welling, 2017] a signal change is quantized to produce a stochastically discretized binary signal (spike train), which is
temporally sparse. In [Cavigelli and Benini, 2020] the authors applied delta network inference on pre-trained CNNs
with videos recorded from a fixed camera (video surveillance). As the temporal sparsity is very high in these video
frames, the presented results show a considerable speedup even with the off-the-shelf GPUs, without a sparsity-aware
      3
    Albeit exploitation of structural (aka weight) sparsity for network pruning is also very old topic in ANN literature [LeCun et al.,
1989]


                                                                  3
                                                             arXiv Template                                   A P REPRINT



compute architecture. And likewise in [Gao et al., 2018] the authors report a substantial inference speed-ups and
power-efficiency improvements on RNN FPGA-based accelerators by exploiting temporal sparsity in delta-networks.
An issue when it comes to previous works in delta network inference is the accumulation of errors over time due to the
use of a threshold (level-crossing), deeper in the network, which can lead to drift in the approximation of the activation
signal over time (and hurts the accuracy). Therefore in practice, it is required to reset the state of all the neurons
periodically. In sigma-delta networks a similar problem is addressed by employing a form of PID control to “regulate”
the hysteresis [O’Connor et al., 2018]. Another “nuissance” is the optimization of hyper-parameters (threshold value,
step-size, ...) through an additional optimization process [Yousefzadeh et al., 2019] [Khoei et al., 2020] [Cavigelli and
Benini, 2020] after and outside the training loop.
While using similar concept, the function provided by the proposed Delta Activation Layer differs from both typical
delta networks and sigma-delta networks. During training, the Delta Activation Layer only quantizes the activation
values and therefore acts as a conventional quantization layer. The quantization step size, however, is dynamic and
trainable, and is optimized by using a temporal sparsity penalty. A bigger (coarser) step-size increases the temporal
sparsity but tend to reduce the accuracy. The training optimizer tries to find an optimal set of parameters, including
step-size, that trade the highest possible sparsity (minimizing the sparsity penalty) and highest possible accuracy
(minimizing the accuracy loss).
Our training process results in a conventional quantized DNN. During inference, sigma and delta operations are
introduced at each layer’s quantized output without using threshold. As the activations are already quantized with an
optimum quantization level, the delta operation leads to a particularly sparse signal that merely enumerates quantizer
step changes. By extension to the simpler approach in [Cavigelli and Benini, 2020], which also operates on video data,
our experiments show temporal sparsity can also be very high for recordings with moving cameras, since in deeper
layers of the neural network, where higher-level features are extracted, movement of the camera does not introduce
considerable changes.
In [Chen et al., 2019] the authors demonstrated how quantization results in sparsity improvements for both temporal and
spatial dimensions (with application to 3D CNNs). By contrast to this work, here we train the activation quantization
level per each neuron, channel, or layer for the highest possible temporal sparsity. Potentially seen as a disadvantage is
that this introduces more parameterization and requires more fine-tuning epochs. We discuss this further in section 4.
An important caveat of the nature of the delta operation (including the work presented here), is the requirement for
stateful neurons deeper in a DNN, so as to keep account of past activations. Algorithmically and in software this is
a minor cost as this state is rather simple and most of the times well compressible, however in terms of a hardware
accelerator implementation, this cost might not be negligible. We show in the section 4 that using full Delta Activation
Layers in ResNet-50 results in 40% increase in the usage of memory. We suggest partial use of stateful layers (where
it is more optimized) to partially alleviate this problem. We believe the ultimate solution for memory limitation is
advancement in technology which is discussed in section 4.

2         Methods
2.1        Delta inference

In a general DNN, the output signal of a layer is related to it’s inputs and weights with the following equations:

                                                        Z(t) = g(W, X(t)) + B                                         (1)


                                                            O(t) = f (Z(t))                                           (2)

where W and B are the weight and bias tensors(trainable parameters), X(t) is the input tensor in discrete time (t) 4 and
g is a linear function of the DNN layer inputs (for example dense layer matrix product, strided convolution over a region
of the input, average pooling, or a combination of them). O(t) is the output tensor in time t and f (.) is a non-linear
activation function. Z(t) is an intermediate variable which we can call it “neuron state”.
One can typically introduce temporal sparsity by using the first order difference, as follows:

                                             Linear operations: ∆Z(t) = g(W, ∆X(t))                                   (3)
      4
          t is the algorithm time-step (t > 0), for example can be the frame number in a frame-based system


                                                                    4
                                                       arXiv Template                                           A P REPRINT



                                                t
                                                X
                 Integration(Sigma): Z(t) =           ∆Z(i) + B = ∆Z(t) + Z(t − 1) where Z(0) = B                        (4)
                                                i=1

          Differentiation (Delta): ∆O(t) = O(t) − O(t − 1) = f (Z(t)) − f (Z(t − 1)) where f (Z(0)) = 0                  (5)
Eq. 4 and 5 shows the foundation of delta inference algorithms and sigma-delta networks. In Eq. 3, rather than
processing input tensor (X) directly, only changes are processed. This is possible because g(.) is a linear function.
When temporal sparsity is very high, we expect ∆X(t) (and ∆O(t)) to be sparse tensors, which immediately leverage
zero-skipping operations in Eq. 3.
One difference between the delta inference and the normal inference is the use of bias. In delta inference bias is only
used to initialized the ‘neuron states’ in Eq. 4. However, since bias tensors do not change over time, their delta is zero
and is factored out from Eq. 3.
As neuron state is integrating all the inputs over time, Z(t) in Eq. 1 and 4 are always equal, and so long as the input
is the same, both normal and delta inference provide the exact same result at any time step. To increase the sparsity
in ∆O(t), previous works introduced a threshold on the minimum amount of change to be propagated [Cavigelli and
Benini, 2020] [O’Connor and Welling, 2017] [Neil et al., 2017], which can result in a discrepancy between normal
and delta inference (the latter being a rectified form of the former). The effect of this rectification may be seen as
introducing noise, which a DNN should in principle be robust against. However, if this noise does not have a zero mean
and since it is cumulative over time, it results in bias, which can lead to considerable drift; and necessitates a periodical
network reset or re-calibration to remediate.

2.2   Activation sparsification through quantization

Instead of a level-crossing threshold, here we propose a quantization method for the activations of a DNN, by replacing
f (.) with a quantized fq (., q) in equations 2 and 5; where q refers to the quantization step-size.A larger quantization
step-size decreases the resolution of the signal reconstruction levels (coarser quantization), and therefore neurons of the
next layer receiving this activation signal will process less changes (deltas) between subsequent inputs at (t − 1) and
(t). Fig. 2 shows an illustration of two quantized popular activation functions.




Figure 2: ReLU (y = max(x, 0)), Quantized ReLU(with q = 1), Sigmoid (y = 1/(1 + e−x )) and Quantized
Sigmoid(with q = 0.2) activation functions. Higher level of q results in higher amount of sparsity in ∆O(t)

Note that the quantization operation of the Delta Activation Layer resembles the operation of a Sigma-Delta network
[O’Connor and Welling, 2017], however the Delta Activation Layer propagates a non-binary signal, and thus the
herding-type of operations for the conversion to a binary spike-trains are spared. When using quantization (with a
step-size) instead of a level-crossing threshold, quantized inference and quantized delta-inference provide exact
same results and therefore no error will be accumulated over time (since the threshold on propagation of ∆O is zero).


                                                             5
                                                      arXiv Template                                           A P REPRINT



In addition, as we do quantization during training (in contrast with post-training threshold adjustment in [Cavigelli and
Benini, 2020] and [Yousefzadeh et al., 2019]), most of the accuracy drop due to the quantization error can be corrected
with longer training.

2.2.1        Temporal sparsity loss function
By introducing the Delta Activation Layer, we need to add a regularization term in the loss function for encouraging
sparsity optimization. A partial sum is added for every layer to the overall loss function and the sparsity factor (λ), is a
hyper-parameter to adjust the contribution of sparsity loss of every layer in the total loss5 .

                                                                  X
                                               LossSparsity,l =         |∆O(t)l |                                       (6)

                                                                  X
                                   LossT otal = LossAccuracy +          λl × LossSparsity,l                             (7)
                                                                    l

where l is the layer index.
Note that LossSparsity,l is entering the cost function as an L1-penalty term for a set of constraints that relate parameters
though the activation tensors (and in this sense the sparsity factors λl are the respective Lagrange multipliers). This
implies that the LossSparsity,l and LossAccuracy are competing and the optimization strives to find a set of parameters
that balance the two losses for error (accuracy) and sparsity.

2.3        Surrogate gradient of the quantization function

As described the Delta_activation layer framework and library takes advantage of activation quantization in order to
introduce temporal sparsity. To recap, the way this is effected is as follows. Quantization confines and bins the real
numbers into a fixed set centroids represented in the levels of the quantization scheme. When two numbers (e.g. two
subsequent in time activations) lie nearby in range, namely within one quantization step, they get binned in the same
level by the quantizer and their delta produces a zero. The smaller the set of levels (or the larger the quantization
step) the more likely it gets for two numbers to get quantized in the same level (i.e. have the same centroid) and their
delta to be zero. The smaller the set of levels, on the other hand, the larger the quantization error/noise introduced,
which, when it is in the same range as the optimization error, the training convergence can slow down or get stuck
prematurely, and consequences for the final achievable model accuracy. There is therefore an objective tussle and an
optimal trade-off between quantization induced sparsity and accuracy, which we would like optimization process to
auto-fine-tune. And this motivates making the quantization step a “learnable” parameter in the cost function. This, also
enables the additional flexibility of maintaining a different quantization step per-layer, or per-channel as opposed to a
globally uniform one (with entails benefits in terms of resource utilisation and better sparsity control).
Now, in practise a quantization function is by virtue non-smooth and non-continuous, making its presence inside the
cost function problematic in face of gradient-based optimisation (through back-propagation), simply because it has
no closed-form gradient (it is non differentiable). For this reason one need to resort in an approximate or a surrogate
gradient as a replacement.
The key insight for finding a good choice of a surrogate gradient to use with the Delta_activation layer, lies in expressing
mathematically the relationship between the quantization step (or number of levels) and the induced temporal sparsity
by means of the delta operator (described above). And the goal is to formalize this relationship through a constraint,
which can be made part of the cost function as a Lagrangian term; essentially the penalty term that we have shown in
Eq. 6 and 7 above.
Here, we introduce and motivate the surrogate that we chose for our experiments, although for the herein described
methodology this is neither the only plausible, nor likely the best possible one can use in the Delta_activation layer.
In this work, we chose to perform quantization by using the straight-forward uniform (linear step) quantization function,
shown in Eq.8.

                                                                    f (Z)
                                               fq (Z, q) = round(         )×q                                           (8)
                                                                       q
      5
          Essentially


                                                             6
                                                            arXiv Template                                                   A P REPRINT



For gradient optimization with back-propagation, the gradient of fq (Z, q) with regard to Z and q needs to be computed
for the minimization of the cost function of the accuracy loss and sparsity loss. As the quantization function is
non-differentiable, we need to provide replacements for the actual gradients.
For the gradient of fq (Z, q) with regard to Z we used the gradient of the non-quantized activation function, as it is
typical with quantization training of neural networks [Jacob et al., 2018], and which dissolves to the straight-through
estimator (STE) for f (Z).

                                                         ∂fq (Z, q)   ∂f (Z)
                                                                    =                                                                   (9)
                                                            ∂Z         ∂Z

Next, as we want the step-size q in the Delta Activation Layer to also be a trainable parameter6 , the gradient of fq (Z, q)
with regard to q needs to be functionally connected to the credit assignment aspect of the error back propagation process,
so as to influence with the right incentive the optimization process; namely towards increasing the quantization step q
and thereby the activation sparsity after the delta operation.
The quantization step q gets updated with Eq.10.

                                   ∂Losstotal             ∂Lossaccuracy X ∂Losssparsity,l
                      ∆q = −η                 =⇒ ∆q = −η(              +                  )                                           (10)
                                      ∂q                      ∂q               ∂q
                                                                                             l

Because increase in q generally results in decrease of the sparsity penalty Losssparsity , in its simplest probably form it
                                  ∂Losssparsity,l
suffices to take the surrogate of                 to be equal −|Losssparsity,l | or simply −Losssparsity,l (since from
                                        ∂q
Eq. 7 Losssparsity,l is an L1-norm and thus always positive).

                                                ∂Losssparsity,l
                                                                = −ηLosssparsity,l                                                    (11)
                                                     ∂q

Eq.11 encourages higher increase in the quantization step q, for bigger Losssparsity,l . In turn the larger quantization
step, leads to fewer quantization levels, and a higher probability for delta activations to result in zeros, thereby reduction
in Losssparsity,l .
While this seemed to be consistent in our experimentation, we found that a further extension of it, where we use the
current step size q as a normalizing reciprocal (E.q. 12), gives an “accelerated” gradient and better results.

                                                ∂Losssparsity,l    Losssparsity,l
                                                                =−                                                                    (12)
                                                     ∂q                 q

                                                     ∂Lossaccuracy X Losssparsity,l
                                        ∆q = −η(                  −                 )                                                 (13)
                                                         ∂q               q
                                                                             l

The intuition now is that, when the penalty Losssparsity,l is high, a small currently quantization step q will be subjected
to a larger increase than an already large quantization step. And when the penalty Losssparsity,l is small (and the delta
activation model is already sparse), a small currently quantization step will be subject to a rather small increase, while
an already large quantization step will virtually remain the unchanged.
We can break-down the LHS and RHS of Eq. 12 in components of the chain-rule as follows7 :

                                        ∂Losssparsity,1   X ∂|∆Ol | ∂∆Ol   X |∆Ol | ∂∆Ol
                     LHS(Eq.12) :                       =          ×     =         ×                                                  (14)
                                             ∂q             ∂∆Ol     ∂q       ∆Ol    ∂q
    6
      The step-size (q) can be global for the entire network, or different per layer, or different per neuron. In addition, in the case of a
CNN (as in our experiments), it can be shared across every channel (convolutional feature map), so as to “interact” with the bias term
during the optimization process. In this case, the number of additional trainable parameters (quantization levels) equals the number
of biases.
    7        ∂|x|     |x|
      Given       =       , x 6= 0
             ∂x        x

                                                                     7
                                                     arXiv Template                                           A P REPRINT




                                           LossSparsity,l   X |∆Ol | X |∆Ol | ∆Ol
                         RHS(Eq.12) :                     =         =        ×                                        (15)
                                                q               q       ∆Ol    q
Comparing Eq.14 and Eq.15 we can conclude the final form of the surrogate of the gradient with regard to the
quantization step (which we used in Keras):

                         ∂∆Ol    ∆Ol    ∂Ol    Ol    ∂fq (Z, q)    fq (Z, q)
                              =−     =⇒     =−    =⇒            =−                                                    (16)
                          ∂q      q      ∂q    q        ∂q             q
So finally, substituting Eq. 16 back in Eq. 10 we get

                            ∂Losstotal                   ∂Lossaccuracy X ∂Losssparsity,l
                      ∆q = −η            =⇒ ∆q = −η(                     +                   )
                                ∂q                            ∂q                   ∂q
                                                                             l
                               ∂Lossaccuracy    ∂fq (Z, q) X ∂Losssparsity,l      ∂fq (Z, q)
                  =⇒ ∆q = −η (               ×             +                    ×            )
                                 ∂fq (Z, q)         ∂q               ∂fq (Z, q)       ∂q
                                                               l
                                                                                                                      (17)
                              ∂Lossaccuracy    −fq (Z, q) X ∂Losssparsity,l       −fq (Z, q)
                 =⇒ ∆q = −η (                ×            +                     ×            )
                                ∂fq (Z, q)          q               ∂fq (Z, q)         q
                                                              l
                                              fq (Z, q) ∂Lossaccuracy X ∂Losssparsity,l
                                 =⇒ ∆q = η             (                 +                   )
                                                  q        ∂fq (Z, q)           ∂fq (Z, q)
                                                                                     l

To summarize our answer, the surrogate gradients are as follows:

                                                  ∂fq (Z, q)   ∂f (Z)
                                                             =                                                        (18)
                                                     ∂Z         ∂Z

                                                ∂fq (Z, q)    fq (Z, q)
                                                           =−                                                         (19)
                                                   ∂q             q
It is also worth pointing out that there are several options [Gale et al., 2019] that can be used to encourage sparsity of
the ∆O activations tensor, most of which are compatible with the Delta Activation Layer. The more promising options
in recent literature [Kurtz et al., 2020] are the various forms of the Hoyer penalty, and the difference of L1 and L2
norms. Nevertheless, as our focus is in show-casing the temporal sparsification pipeline with the Delta Activation Layer,
we confined our experimentation with the more popular L1 penalty, for comparison purposes against a larger corpus of
DNN literature, e.g. [Georgiadis, 2019].

2.4   Selective spatio-temporal sparsification

Since delta type of inference incurs additional operations and memory overheads per each non-zero delta value, one
may prefer to only use it for specific layers where the saving from sparsity can be considerable. Typically, besides the
linear operations in Eq. 3, two extra operations (integration in Eq. 4 and differentiation in Eq. 5) are required. However,
if one wants to feed-in a Delta Activation Layer from a “normal” activation layer, as the input will be X(t) instead of
∆X(t), the integration step in Eq. 4 should be skipped. Similarly, if the output of a Delta Activation Layer is connected
to a “normal” inference layer, the differentiation operation in Eq. 5 should be skipped. Two figurative examples of such
configurations are laid out in Fig. 3.

2.5   Delta Activation Layer configurations

Our Delta Activation Layer comes with many several configuration options to make the use customizable. Here is a list
of most important parameters:

      1. Quantization mode: the granularity of applying quantization, which can be neuron-wise, channel-wise or
         layer-wise
      2. Activation function: the type of activation function for DNN layer (e.g ReLU, Softmax, etc.)
      3. Sparsity factor (λ in E.q. 7)


                                                            8
                                                          arXiv Template                                                A P REPRINT




Figure 3: A) An example of a delta inference when the input and output of the network are not delta type. DAL
stands for Delta Activation Layer. DAL(Delta-Only) layer is Delta Activation Layer where the integration phase is
skipped. Similarly, DAL(Sigma-Only) layer is a configuration of the Delta Activation Layer where the differentiation is
skipped. And DAL(Sigma-Delta) layer is a complete Delta Activation Layer. B) When only 2 layers of the 5-layer
DNN is configured to process in the delta inference method. Normal activation layers are activation layers without state
and therefore are cheaper to be implemented. Normal activation may also use L1 regularization on the activations to
improve spatial sparsity as described in [Kurtz et al., 2020]


       4. Max Pooling: Poolings are one of the most important operations in the DNN. Even-tough some types of
          poolings are linear (for example Average Pooling or Stride) and can be integrated normally as part of Eq. 3,
          Max Pooling is an exception. It is not possible to apply Max Pooling directly on ∆O(t), since it is a non-linear
          operation. When Max Pooling is used, it should be applied on O(t). Therefore it is implemented as an option
          inside the Delta Activation Layer. To use Max_Pooling, this option should be activated and the size of the
          pooling should be defined.
       5. Integration skip: if the integration operation (Eq.4) should be skipped or not.
       6. Differentiation skip: if the differentiation operation (Eq.5) should be skipped or not.

We have used channel-wise quantization mode in all experiments in this paper, since it is a good balance between
number of parameters and performance, and suits the CNN structure.
The optimal selection of a sparsity factor may be automated through grid-searched as a hyper-parameter. However,
in practise it is subject to user/system requirements since it is the knob that controls the trade-off between activation
sparsity rate8 (compute and power efficiency) and accuracy. For the experiments in this work we have used a heuristic
way of setting the sparsity factor relating to each Delta Activation Layer such that it is proportional to the the fan-out in
terms of MAC operations downstream. For example when a layer is connected to 128 convolution filters with 3 × 3
kernels, every non-zero neuron activation feeds in 128 × 3 × 3 MAC operations. Since our final goal is to reduce
the number of operations, we increased the sparsity factor more for layers whose neurons can triggers more MAC
operations.
   8
     Activation sparsity rate which measures the rate of zero activations in a feature map, is not to be confused with sparsity factor
λl in E.q. 7; albeit the two are correlated by virtue of optimizing the cost function.


                                                                  9
                                                          arXiv Template                                                 A P REPRINT



3    Results

Our experiments with temporally sparse video inference are mostly based on the ResNet-50 [He et al., 2016] and
MobileNet [Howard et al., 2017] DNN architectures, and the challenging UCF-101 dataset. UCF-101 contains 13320
videos from 101 action categories for human action recognition taken with both fixed and moving cameras. Even
though a fixed camera seems more appealing for exploiting temporal sparsity, our results show that temporal sparsity in
deeper layers of a DNN is also very high in recordings with a moving camera.
ResNet-50 and MobileNet were originally used for image processing, however we used them here for video stream
processing by employing it in the single-frame arrangement described in [Karpathy et al., 2014], and leaving the temporal
dimension as the task for the delta inference processing. Having said that the best accuracies for the UCF101 dataset to
our knowledge have been achieved using 3D convnets with two-stream input (frames and optical flows)[Carreira and
Zisserman, 2017]. The simpler model we consider however, permits an easier understanding of the sparsification effects
of the Delta Activation Layer.
To benchmark the sparsity/accuracy trade-off when applying the Delta Activation Layer we have used 4 different
setups9 . In the baseline setup we have fine-tuned Resnet-50 for UCF101 dataset without using any sparsity penalty. In
this case, we used a pre-trained ResNet-50 for ‘image-net’ dataset [He et al., 2016] and fine-tune only its last Dense
(fully connected) layer and the output layer for UCF101 dataset. We used a standard input image size of (224, 224),
batch size of 32, and the SGD optimizer for 8 epochs. We have tried to extend fine-tuning to more layers but the best
results were achieved by fine-tuning the last two layers. For MobileNet, we fine-tuned the whole network for 3 epochs.
For our second setup, we applied “L1 regularization loss" on activations of the baseline network to have a conventional
spatially sparse DNN. For this setup (and the remaining two setups), we had to fine-tune (re-train) the whole ResNet-50
network. For Spatial Sparsification setup, we started from the pre-trained weights of our baseline network and re-train
all the layers until it is relatively converged.
As the third setup for our experiments, we have used a network where a Delta Activation Layer is only used as the input
layer as illustrated in Fig. 4. In this case, the network only processes changes of the scene (deltas only) without having
the reference background in its state, which is sparse, to begin with. This is equivalent to providing inputs from a DVS
sensor [Lichtsteiner et al., 2008], or similar to the method presented in [Chadha et al., 2019] where the input deltas are
considered as a simpler version of optical flows. The “normal activation" layers in this experiment are also equipped
with “L1 regularization" of activations during training for higher spatial sparsity. Therefore this setup is called Spatial
sparsification + Input delta. Same as the second setup, here we started from a baseline network and fine-tune all the
layers until it relatively converges.
The last setup is using Delta Activation Layer in place of all the activation layers in ResNet-50 network (same as Fig.
3(A)) and therefore results in exploitation of temporal sparsity in all the layers of ResNet-50. We called this setup
Temporal sparsification. Again, here we started from the pre-trained weights of the baseline model and fine-tune
all the layers until a relatively good convergence. In this setup and during training, Delta Activation Layer calculates
temporal sparsity loss by using Eq.6 and perform activation quantization during training to minimize the temporal
sparsity loss. We repeated the same process for MobileNet.
Table 1 reports results on sparsity gains during inference versus accuracy, from experiments with different training
setups of the ResNet-50/MobileNet networks (alongside some reference accuracy scores achieved in the literature for
the same dataset, albeit by using different DNN architectures).
The results reported in Table 1 aim to highlight a couple of important aspects. First of all similarly to spatial sparsification
(e.g. by means of L1 Regularization), temporal sparsification my means of the Delta Activation Layer may affect
adversely the accuracy. Since adding the Delta Activation Layer requires quantization and fine-tuning of the entire
network (in comparison with the baseline network where only the last layers are fine-tuned), there is a tussle between
training error and quantization error that can either lower accuracy or cost the training process more iterations to
recover it10 . Second, at the same time, the gain in sparsity increase is also considerable when accounting for temporal
sparsification. Table 1 shows that spatio-temporal specification results in better sparsity in the operations while the
accuracy drop is in the same range of “L1 Regularization" for spatial sparsity.

    9
      training/fine-tuning were performed on an NVIDIA Geforce RTX 2080, but experiments are expected to be reproducible in any
recent CUDA-enabled GPU.
   10
      we noticed that different quantization schemes seem to affect variably the percent of accuracy loss in conjunction with the time
the model is allowed to train. The longer the training time, the closer it comes to recovering the accuracy loss, but at a slowing-down
convergence rate (which also gets even slower with coarser quantization levels). Due to the time constraints the stopping criterion for
which we reported the results was based on number of epochs and not the convergence error.


                                                                 10
                                                     arXiv Template                                           A P REPRINT



                          Training setup                         Classification accuracy Operation Sparsity
          3D two-stream CNN [Kalfaoglu et al., 2020]                       98.69%                        –
              Slow fusion in [Karpathy et al., 2014]                        65.4%                        –
       Spatial convent in [Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014]                    72.8%                        –
                       ResNet-50 (Baseline)                                  73%                      49.1%
                ResNet-50 (Spatial sparsification)                          65.4%                     65.3%
         ResNet-50 (Spatial sparsification + Input delta)                   70.4%                     68.8%
              ResNet-50 (Temporal sparsification)                          67.6%                      93.1%
                       MobileNet (Baseline)                                 77.1%                     38.2%
             MobileNet (Temporal sparsification)                             73%                      77.7%
Table 1: Results for UCF101-based human action recognition, from our experiments and some those reported in
previous works. The reported results from [Karpathy et al., 2014] and [Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014] have used 2D
convolutions over individual frames (similar to our approach), while [Kalfaoglu et al., 2020] used a more complex
approach and we include their results here only to reference the best achieved accuracy on this dataset. In our
experiments, the classification accuracy is the average of the classification results across the 32 consecutive frames (for
every each video in the dataset). Operation sparsity is the ratio of MAC operations with zero activations over the total
number of MAC operations (weight sparsity is not accounted here).




 Figure 4: A) An example of a delta inference when only input is in the form of delta [Chadha et al., 2019]. This
 network exploits temporal sparsity only in its input (DAL stands for Delta Activation Layer). Here we skipped the
‘DAL(Sigma-Only)’ layer and process the input deltas directly in the following layers. In this case, the following layers
 process the deltas without remembering the past. This network should learn to recognize actions only based on the delta
 frames and won’t be equivalent to the original DNN. please note that the number of layers and network configuration in
 this figure is only an example and does not represent ResNet-50.


Fig. 5 shows details ratio of activation sparsity in ResNet-50 per layer. It is evident that both temporal and spatial
sparsity in general increase when going deeper inside the ResNet-50 network. A fully connected layer (layer 50) has
less spatio-temporal sparsity than previous layers. It is interesting to note that the layers where skip connections are
merging with the main branch (layers 4,7,10,13,16,..,46), illustrated in Fig.6, exhibit the lowest temporal sparsity in
their neighbourhood (non-zero deltas are maximum compares to the neighboring layers), while this is not the case for
spatial sparsity.
One observed advantage of temporal sparsity in these experiments, is that number of inference operations does not scale
up linearly with the increase in frame rate. Increasing the frame-rate increases the temporal precision of the network
and is important when a low-latency inference is required (for example in self-driving cars). However, increasing
the frame-rate does not increase the amount of computations linearly. In general, higher frame-rates results in higher
temporal sparsity as our results in Fig. 7 show; where we run the inference on UCF101 dataset with different frame-rates
(by sub-sampling in time). This observation is more prominent with higher frame rates (like 120fps).
The degree of temporal sparsity is also dependent on the type of motion actions in the scene. In Table 2 we list the ‘3’
classes with highest average temporal sparsity across layers and the ‘3’ classes with lowest. For the low sparsity classes,
we noticed that most of the videos are recorded with moving cameras while the highly sparsity classes correspond
to videos recorded with fixed cameras. Also, the actions in videos of high sparsity classes are slow and limited. We
therefore were curious to find out how the amount of movement in the input affects the temporal sparsity in the features
generated deeper inside the neural network. Fig. 8 shows the layer-wise non-zero deltas for two classes of the test set,
the one with lowest temporal sparsity (swing) and the one with highest temporal sparsity (wall push ups), normalized
by the average sparsity degree of all classes. In general, the effect of movement in the input frames has less effect on
the last layers of neural network where high level features (concepts) are extracted.


                                                            11
                                                     arXiv Template                                            A P REPRINT




Figure 5: The number of non-zero activations for the baseline network, spatial sparsification with “L1 regularization",
and temporal sparsification with Delta_Action layer in Resnet-50. Layer ‘0’ is the input layer and the Layer ‘50’ is the
dense layer. The output layer is not shown since activations in the output layer does not trigger any internal operation.
Layer indexing here is always the same as original ResNet-50. Delta Activation Layers are not considered as extra
layers but as a replacement for activations in the original network.




Figure 6: Residual block in ResNet-50, the shortcut path is either just a bypass connection or it contains a convolution
operation. Temporal sparsity in the Delta Activation Layer just after the ADD operation is minimum.


We also tried to find a correlation between the degree of temporal sparsity and the rate of compression by the video
codec used. Fig. 9 suggests that there maybe some weak correlation but this relationship is not straight-forward. Our
calculated correlation coefficients using Pearson (assuming Gaussianity) and Spearman (non-Gaussianity assumptions)
methods [Artusi et al., 2002] give a coefficient of about 0.36%. PCA and ICA analyses point to another strong
component in video compression rate beside temporal activation sparsity rate. Video compression techniques are very
advanced compared to our simple temporal delta processing and while both temporal and spatial redundancies are
properly exploited in the compression algorithms there are other also other aspects that such clever algorithms capture
(e.g. non-uniform redundancies by learning dictionaries of sequences or filters). It can be seen that the compression
rates in videos are an order of magnitude higher than the activation sparsity rates. This means there is still a large space
for improvement to “properly” sparsify DNN computations.


                                                            12
                                                    arXiv Template                                           A P REPRINT




 Figure 7: Activation sparsity rate (percent of zero activations in a feature map) versus number of frames per second

                                          Class name         Activation Sparsity
                                             Swing                 83.5%
                                             Punch                 84.2%
                                            Lunges                 84.5%
                                       Cricket Bowling             93.2%
                                      Writing On Board             93.9%
                                        Wall Push ups              94.4%
Table 2: Selected classes of UCF101 dataset with highest and lowest activation sparsities in temporally sparse ResNet-50.



4   Discussion

In this work, we introduced a method of adding temporal sparsity in general DNN inference on video data. There are
two key aspects that make this work distinctive. One is the fact that given a trained model we look into sparsifying
activations arbitrarily deep in the network structure, i.e. we do not only focus on preprocessing the inputs or the first
layers of the network. Rather, the proposed mechanism is deployable after any layer, and can be flexibly employed with
any subset of the network’s layers. The other aspect is that our approach can work synergetically with training. This
means that where refinement phase (e.g. transfer-learning) or vanilla training is feasible, an optimization constraint is
introduced to leverage the sparsification effectiveness of our mechanism during inference.
Integration of the Delta Activation Layer in a DNN is not cost-free. There are two main overheads introduced which
need to be weighed against the benefits of introducing temporal sparsity (discussed below). For this reason we promote
the selective use of the Delta Activation Layer only between layers where there is a clear gain to be made. More
specifically, in Fig.10 we observe that the temporal sparsity gain (over spatial sparsity) is very different in different
layers.
The first overhead introduced by a Delta Activation Layer stems from the requirement to keep track of the associated
neuron states, which increases the overall memory footprint. For example in ResNet-50 where the number of parameters
is almost 23M, there are 9.2M neurons. When using normal inference (not using Delta Activation Layer), it is required
to store only activations for two consecutive layers at any moment during inference (the input to a layer and its output).
To account for the widest layers this is only about 1M neurons which leads to total 25MB of memory (when states
store in 16b floating-point format and weights are 8b). Inference with full Delta Activation Layer in all layers requires
about 41MB compared to 25MB for normal inference of a single frame. In general, memory footprint is a serious
constraint in all DNN accelerators and for this reason newer DNN accelerator architectures are catering for it (e.g. use
of flash-memory is becoming more mainstream [Fick, 2018]). The new NVIDIA Ampere architecture contains 40GB
of DRAM memory which is 70% more than its predecessor).


                                                           13
                                                     arXiv Template                                            A P REPRINT




Figure 8: Average ratio of non-zero activations (deltas) for videos of ‘swing’ action (lowest temporal sparsity) and
videos of ‘wall push ups’ (highest temporal sparsity) versus the average sparsities of all classes. It is interesting to see
that the low/high amount of changes in the input frame mostly affect the low level features in the beginning layers.




Figure 9: Averaged activation sparsity rate versus the averaged video compression rate for each UCF101 class (i.e. data
points are centroids


The second overhead, and since more memory is involved, is memory access time and energy. Increasing memory
footprint may force the DNN accelerator architecture to use a hierarchical memory structure to balance the memory


                                                            14
                                                      arXiv Template                                            A P REPRINT



footprint and the platform cost. For example, external DRAM memory is two orders of magnitude cheaper than a
local SRAM memory but at the same time it consumes two orders of magnitude more energy [Sze et al., 2017]. To
have a clear picture, imagine a DNN accelerator with only 1MB of on-chip memory. For the normal inference with
ResNet-50, we could use the local memory for activations state (read and write operations) and external memory for the
weights (read operations). However, for delta-based inference, we are forced to use external memory for both weights
and neuron activations. This will results in three times more external memory accesses (reading weights and states,
writing states back) which is almost equal to three to five times more energy consumption (since external memory
access consumes much more than any internal operation, and since neuron states normally have higher bit-width than
weights). As a result, although we have observed that temporal sparsity typically reduces the number of operations, on
average, by a factor of five or more when compared to spatial sparsification, in practice the amount of energy savings is
less than 5x and very dependent on the memory hierarchy in the hardware. On the more optimistic side, however, our
comparison against video compression rates in Fig. 9 suggests that there is plenty of room for achieving even higher
sparsity, perhaps exploitable with more advanced algorithms, or future ramifications of the Delta Activation Layer. In
addition, new memory technologies (like resistive RAM, embedded DRAM, and embedded Flash memory) may change
the aforementioned cost calculations for on-chip memory in the near future.




Figure 10: Layer-wise sparsity gain for temporal sparsity setup over spatial sparsity setup (ratio of non-zero activations)
in our experiments with ResNet-50 and UCF101. The average gain is 5. The blue/red bars are the low gain layers with
the gains of less than two/one.

Each Delta Activation Layer instantiation also introduces additional trainable parameters to the network. For our
experiments with ResNet-50, a total of around 23K new parameters are added to the previous 23M weights and biases
(+0.1%). As the Delta Activation Layer introduces temporal sparsity constraint terms in the optimisation objective
during training, these are in effect also regularizes against over-fitting. Besides that, it would also be possible to
consider additional regularization terms in the cost function (e.g. Lasso, group Lasso, etc) targeting explicitly the
weights/parameters controlling the network structure, rather than implicitly through the activations. In our experiment
here we did not see such a need, however, a more systematic exploration and comparison with different regularisation
regimes are the next steps for our future work with the Delta Activation Layer.
Other interesting aspects which we have not experimented with at this point, but which are in our plans for follow-up
work include (a) to confirm the current results or their variability on different network architectures, but more importantly
in relation to the capacity of the network, e.g. with lottery ticket [Frankle and Carbin, 2018] and distilled [Hinton et al.,
2015] type of networks; (b) the potential effects of other activation functions than ReLU in the effectiveness of the
Delta Activation Layer, (c) using an advance quantization scheme along with the sparsity loss to reduce the accuracy


                                                            15
                                                   arXiv Template                                         A P REPRINT



drop and (d) the effect of lateral inhibition and winner-take-all strategies in promoting temporal sparsity [Ahmad and
Scheinkman, 2019].

Conflict of Interest Statement
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that
could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Author Contributions
A.Y and M.S. contributed equally in this work.

Funding
This work was supported in part by the EU H2020 grants “TEMPO” and “ANDANTE”.

Acknowledgments
This work is partially funded by EU H2020 grants 826655 “TEMPO” and 876925 “ANDANTE".

References
V. Sze, Y. Chen, T. Yang, and J. S. Emer. Efficient processing of deep neural networks: A tutorial and survey.
   Proceedings of the IEEE, 105(12):2295–2329, 2017. doi:10.1109/JPROC.2017.2761740.
Song Han, Huizi Mao, and W. Dally. Deep compression: Compressing deep neural network with pruning, trained
   quantization and huffman coding. CoRR, abs/1510.00149, 2016a.
Trevor Gale, Erich Elsen, and Sara Hooker. The state of sparsity in deep neural networks. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1902.09574, 2019.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1503.02531, 2015.
Trevor Gale, Matei Zaharia, Cliff Young, and Erich Elsen. Sparse gpu kernels for deep learning. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2006.10901, 2020.
Vivienne Sze, Yu-Hsin Chen, Tien-Ju Yang, and Joel S Emer. How to evaluate deep neural network processors: Tops/w
  (alone) considered harmful. IEEE Solid-State Circuits Magazine, 12(3):28–41, 2020.
Jorge Albericio, Patrick Judd, Tayler Hetherington, Tor Aamodt, Natalie Enright Jerger, and Andreas Moshovos.
   Cnvlutin: Ineffectual-neuron-free deep neural network computing. ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News,
  44(3):1–13, 2016.
Song Han, Xingyu Liu, Huizi Mao, Jing Pu, Ardavan Pedram, Mark A Horowitz, and William J Dally. Eie: efficient
   inference engine on compressed deep neural network. ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News, 44(3):
   243–254, 2016b.
Angshuman Parashar, Minsoo Rhu, Anurag Mukkara, Antonio Puglielli, Rangharajan Venkatesan, Brucek Khailany,
  Joel Emer, Stephen W Keckler, and William J Dally. Scnn: An accelerator for compressed-sparse convolutional
   neural networks. ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News, 45(2):27–40, 2017.
Alessandro Aimar, Hesham Mostafa, Enrico Calabrese, Antonio Rios-Navarro, Ricardo Tapiador-Morales, Iulia-
  Alexandra Lungu, Moritz B Milde, Federico Corradi, Alejandro Linares-Barranco, Shih-Chii Liu, et al. Nullhop: A
   flexible convolutional neural network accelerator based on sparse representations of feature maps. IEEE transactions
   on neural networks and learning systems, 30(3):644–656, 2018.
Jeremy Kepner, Simon Alford, Vijay Gadepally, Michael Jones, Lauren Milechin, Albert Reuther, Ryan Robinett, and
   Sid Samsi. Graphchallenge. org sparse deep neural network performance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.01181, 2020.
O. Moreira, A. Yousefzadeh, F. Chersi, G. Cinserin, R. J. Zwartenkot, A. Kapoor, P. Qiao, P. Kievits, M. Khoei,
   L. Rouillard, A. Ferouge, J. Tapson, and A. Visweswara. Neuronflow: a neuromorphic processor architecture for live
   ai applications. In 2020 Design, Automation Test in Europe Conference Exhibition (DATE), pages 840–845, 2020.
   doi:10.23919/DATE48585.2020.9116352.


                                                         16
                                                   arXiv Template                                         A P REPRINT



Mike Demler. Brainchip akida is a fast learner, spiking-neural-network processor identifies patterns in unlabeled data.
 Microprocessor Report (2019), 2019.
J. Choquette and W. Gandhi. Nvidia a100 gpu: Performance innovation for gpu computing. In 2020 IEEE Hot Chips
   32 Symposium (HCS), pages 1–43, 2020. doi:10.1109/HCS49909.2020.9220622.
Wei Wen, Chunpeng Wu, Yandan Wang, Yiran Chen, and Hai Li. Learning structured sparsity in deep neural networks.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.03665, 2016.
R. Benosman. What is neuromorphic event-based computer vision? sensors, theory and applications. 2018.
Iain E Richardson. H. 264 and MPEG-4 video compression: video coding for next-generation multimedia. John Wiley
   & Sons, 2004.
S. B. Furber, F. Galluppi, S. Temple, and L. A. Plana. The spinnaker project. Proceedings of the IEEE, 102(5):652–665,
   2014. doi:10.1109/JPROC.2014.2304638.
M. Davies, N. Srinivasa, T. Lin, G. Chinya, Y. Cao, S. H. Choday, G. Dimou, P. Joshi, N. Imam, S. Jain, Y. Liao,
 C. Lin, A. Lines, R. Liu, D. Mathaikutty, S. McCoy, A. Paul, J. Tse, G. Venkataramanan, Y. Weng, A. Wild, Y. Yang,
 and H. Wang. Loihi: A neuromorphic manycore processor with on-chip learning. IEEE Micro, 38(1):82–99, 2018.
 doi:10.1109/MM.2018.112130359.
F. Akopyan, J. Sawada, A. Cassidy, R. Alvarez-Icaza, J. Arthur, P. Merolla, N. Imam, Y. Nakamura, P. Datta, G. Nam,
   B. Taba, M. Beakes, B. Brezzo, J. B. Kuang, R. Manohar, W. P. Risk, B. Jackson, and D. S. Modha. Truenorth: Design
   and tool flow of a 65 mw 1 million neuron programmable neurosynaptic chip. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided
   Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, 34(10):1537–1557, 2015. doi:10.1109/TCAD.2015.2474396.
Daniel Neil, Jun Haeng Lee, Tobi Delbruck, and Shih-Chii Liu. Delta networks for optimized recurrent network
  computation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2584–2593. PMLR, 2017.
Peter O’Connor and Max Welling. Sigma delta quantized networks. ICLR, 2017.
Yukuan Yang, Lei Deng, Shuang Wu, Tianyi Yan, Yuan Xie, and Guoqi Li. Training high-performance and large-scale
  deep neural networks with full 8-bit integers. Neural Networks, 125:70–82, 2020.
Qing Jin, Linjie Yang, and Zhenyu Liao. Adabits: Neural network quantization with adaptive bit-widths. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 2146–2156, 2020.
Bernabé Linares-Barranco. Spike-based vision processing. seeing without frames. In IEEE International Symposium
  on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS’07). Citeseer, 2006.
Yann LeCun, John Denker, and Sara Solla. Optimal brain damage. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  2:598–605, 1989.
Chao-Yuan Wu, Manzil Zaheer, Hexiang Hu, R Manmatha, Alexander J Smola, and Philipp Krähenbühl. Compressed
  video action recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pages 6026–6035, 2018.
Mark Buckler, Philip Bedoukian, Suren Jayasuriya, and Adrian Sampson. Eva2 : Exploiting temporal redundancy in
 live computer vision. In 2018 ACM/IEEE 45th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA),
 pages 533–546. IEEE, 2018.
Max Welling. Herding dynamical weights to learn. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference on
 Machine Learning, pages 1121–1128, 2009.
L. Cavigelli and L. Benini. Cbinfer: Exploiting frame-to-frame locality for faster convolutional network inference
  on video streams. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, 30(5):1451–1465, 2020.
  doi:10.1109/TCSVT.2019.2903421.
Chang Gao, Daniel Neil, Enea Ceolini, Shih-Chii Liu, and Tobi Delbruck. Deltarnn: A power-efficient recurrent neural
  network accelerator. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM/SIGDA International Symposium on Field-Programmable
  Gate Arrays, pages 21–30, 2018.
Peter O’Connor, Efstratios Gavves, Matthias Reisser, and Max Welling. Temporally efficient deep learning with spikes.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  HkZy-bW0-.
Amirreza Yousefzadeh, Mina A Khoei, Sahar Hosseini, Priscila Holanda, Sam Leroux, Orlando Moreira, Jonathan
 Tapson, Bart Dhoedt, Pieter Simoens, Teresa Serrano-Gotarredona, et al. Asynchronous spiking neurons, the natural
 key to exploit temporal sparsity. IEEE Journal on Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems, 9(4):
 668–678, 2019.


                                                         17
                                                    arXiv Template                                          A P REPRINT



Mina A Khoei, Amirreza Yousefzadeh, Arash Pourtaherian, Orlando Moreira, and Jonathan Tapson. Sparnet: Sparse
   asynchronous neural network execution for energy efficient inference. In 2020 2nd IEEE International Conference
   on Artificial Intelligence Circuits and Systems (AICAS), pages 256–260. IEEE, 2020.
Huixiang Chen, Mingcong Song, Jiechen Zhao, Yuting Dai, and Tao Li. 3d-based video recognition acceleration by
   leveraging temporal locality. In Proceedings of the 46th International Symposium on Computer Architecture, pages
   79–90, 2019.
Benoit Jacob, Skirmantas Kligys, Bo Chen, Menglong Zhu, Matthew Tang, Andrew Howard, Hartwig Adam, and
   Dmitry Kalenichenko. Quantization and training of neural networks for efficient integer-arithmetic-only inference.
   In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 2704–2713, 2018.
Mark Kurtz, Justin Kopinsky, Rati Gelashvili, Alexander Matveev, John Carr, Michael Goin, William Leiserson, Sage
   Moore, Bill Nell, Nir Shavit, et al. Inducing and exploiting activation sparsity for fast neural network inference. In
   Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Georgios Georgiadis. Accelerating convolutional neural networks via activation map compression. In Proceedings of
   the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 7085–7095, 2019.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings
   of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 770–778, 2016.
Andrew G Howard, Menglong Zhu, Bo Chen, Dmitry Kalenichenko, Weijun Wang, Tobias Weyand, Marco Andreetto,
   and Hartwig Adam. Mobilenets: Efficient convolutional neural networks for mobile vision applications. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:1704.04861, 2017.
Andrej Karpathy, George Toderici, Sanketh Shetty, Thomas Leung, Rahul Sukthankar, and Li Fei-Fei. Large-scale
   video classification with convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on Computer Vision
   and Pattern Recognition, pages 1725–1732, 2014.
Joao Carreira and Andrew Zisserman. Quo vadis, action recognition? a new model and the kinetics dataset. In
   proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 6299–6308, 2017.
P. Lichtsteiner, C. Posch, and T. Delbruck. A 128× 128 120 db 15 µs latency asynchronous temporal contrast vision
   sensor. IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 43(2):566–576, 2008. doi:10.1109/JSSC.2007.914337.
Aaron Chadha, Yin Bi, Alhabib Abbas, and Yiannis Andreopoulos. Neuromorphic vision sensing for cnn-based action
   recognition. In ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
   (ICASSP), pages 7968–7972. IEEE, 2019.
M Kalfaoglu, Sinan Kalkan, and A Aydin Alatan. Late temporal modeling in 3d cnn architectures with bert for action
   recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.01232, 2020.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Two-stream convolutional networks for action recognition in videos. In
   Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 568–576, 2014.
R Artusi, P Verderio, and E Marubini. Bravais-pearson and spearman correlation coefficients: meaning, test of
   hypothesis and confidence interval. The International journal of biological markers, 17(2):148–151, 2002.
Dave       Fick.             Mythic      @     hot    chips     2018.             https://medium.com/mythic-ai/
   mythic-hot-chips-2018-637dfb9e38b7, 2018.
Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding sparse, trainable neural networks. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:1803.03635, 2018.
Subutai Ahmad and Luiz Scheinkman. How can we be so dense? the benefits of using highly sparse representations.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.11257, 2019.




                                                          18
