Photonic Neuromorphic Accelerators for Event-Based Imaging
Flow Cytometry



I. Tsilikas1,2, ⸸, A. Tsirigotis1⸸, G. Sarantoglou, S. Deligiannidis3, A. Bogris3, C.
Posch4, G. Van den Branden4, C. Mesaritakis1*
1
  Department of Information and Communication Systems Engineering, University of the Aegean, Palama
2, 83100, Samos - Greece 2 Department of Physics, School of applied mathematical and physical sciences,
Zografou Campus, 157 80, Athens - Greece
3
  Department of Informatics and Computer Engineering, University of West Attica, Ag. Spyridonos,
Egaleo – Greece
4
  Prophesee Metavision, rue du faubourg Saint-Antoine 74, 75012 Paris-France
*
    cmesar@aegean.gr
⸸
    these authors contributed equally to this work



Abstract
In this work, we present experimental results of a high-speed label-free imaging cytometry system that
seamlessly merges the high-capturing rate and data sparsity of an event-based CMOS camera with
lightweight photonic neuromorphic processing. This combination offers high classification accuracy and a
massive reduction in the number of trainable parameters of the digital machine-learning back-end. The
event-based camera is capable of capturing 1 Gevents/sec, where events correspond to pixel contrast
changes, similar to the retina’s ganglion cell function. The photonic neuromorphic accelerator is based on
a hardware-friendly passive optical spectrum slicing technique that is able to extract meaningful features
from the generated spike-trains using a purely analogue version of the convolutional operation. The
experimental scenario comprises the discrimination of artificial polymethyl methacrylate calibrated beads,
having different diameters, flowing at a mean speed of 0.01m/sec. Classification accuracy, using only
lightweight, FPGA-compatible digital machine-learning schemes has topped at 98.2%. On the other hand,
by experimentally pre-processing the raw spike data through the proposed photonic neuromorphic spectrum
slicer at a rate of 3×106 images per second, we achieved an accuracy of 98.6%. This performance was
accompanied by a reduction in the number of trainable parameters at the classification back-end by a factor
ranging from 8 to 22, depending on the configuration of the digital neural network. These results confirm
that neuromorphic sensing and neuromorphic computing can be efficiently merged to a unified bio-inspired
system, offering a holistic enhancement in emerging bio-imaging applications.




Introduction
Imaging flow cytometry (IFC) is the physical evolution of conventional flow cytometry (FC)1 that
strengthens the light-scatter recording capabilities of FC with accurate recording of the morphological
features of the particles under investigation. IFC significantly enhances the detection capabilities of typical
cytometers2. Furthermore, visualization of spatial information adds an additional layer of qualitative
information and allows the simultaneous recording of both brightfield and darkfield images3,4 without
hindering typical fluorescent-based analysis. Furthermore, the high throughput of IFC schemes minimizes
the lab-to-diagnose time to few minutes, unlocks the use of ultra-low sample volumes, whereas more
importantly allows the detection of very rare cell populations5, such as cancer cells in blood flow6, profile
complex phenotypes or capture the associated dynamic of cell development phases1,7. Exploiting these
merits, IFC has started infiltrating a broad range of applications among which the most prominent are new
drug discovery8, personalized medicine, DNA sequencing and rapid disease diagnostics3,9,10 . In principle,
the above applications can be partially addressed by conventional high-throughput FC, but in most cases, a
fluorescent agent is required that in turn can affect the molecule/cell’s chemical or biological properties and
thus can compromise the detection sensitivity or render it difficult to be applied. Furthermore, conventional
FCs are mechanically complex and costly, demand high sample volume due to the fact that their output is
based on statistics, mandate the use of elaborate microfluidic systems and last but not least can be operated
only from trained personnel. This last aspect is of paramount importance, as easy-to-handle home-care
diagnostics are a rapidly growing necessity in modern societies with an aging population.
As a response, during the last years, a growing number of IFC modalities have emerged, that try to
simultaneously address two contradicting requirements: namely high-speed operation and crisp spatial
feature capturing. The contradiction is based on the fact that conventional capturing devices, experience
blur effects, when high frame rate is requested, due to their limited bandwidth and high latency. Aiming to
amend this, a wide pallet of technologies has been proposed, each offering vastly different performance
metrics, in terms of the maximum particle flow that they can handle, footprint and wavelength range that
they can operate. Broadly, IFC technologies can be categorized into two main categories: Single
detector/pixel IFCs and 2-dimensional (2D) IFCs. The first category is dominated by time-stretched based
approaches, where spatial information is projected in time and it is detected through a single high-speed
photodiode. In this case, spatial resolution is linked to temporal resolution and thus it can proliferate by the
high-speed capabilities of photonic technology11,12, theoretically offering detection of particle flow >106
particles/s. Following a similar concept, dual comb microscopy schemes, projects spatial information to the
consecutive radio-frequency (RF) beating of two optical combs with different free spectral range13,14.
Despite the discrete merits of both techniques, they both mandate complex optical setups, costly optical
sources, are restricted to the near-infrared (NIR) wavelengths, while both, in practice, generate massive
amount of data during acquisition. In the 2D IFC category, time delay and integration (TDI) cameras allow
motion-blur free images but at the cost of low particle-speed (<3000 particle/s), this trade off stems from
the necessity of high-integration time to unlock sufficient gain at the detector15. Alternatively, schemes
based on strobe-photography can unlock high rates exceeding 50000 particles/s but at the cost of using
sophisticated microfluidic schemes so as to enable precise control of the particle motion (trajectory and
speed)16. Similarly, to the 1D case, 2D modalities also in typical cases generate an increased volume of
data.
Recently, an alternative type of camera has been proposed for IFC, which follows a bio-inspired acquisition
principle that relies on autonomous and asynchronously recording contrast detection events, instead of the
camera periodically transmitting every pixel’s intensity in the form of a frame17. In detail, event-based
cameras (neuromorphic cameras) detect the contrast variation among adjustment pixels and transmit, in an
asynchronous manner electrical spikes, similar to the retina-ganglion cells in mammals. Through this
technique, time-continuous data transmission is limited to pixels detecting temporal contrast events in their
field of view, thus massively reducing transmission bandwidth requirements, while offering wide dynamic
range acquisition and radically increased capturing rate (i.e. temporal resolution) to IFC compatible levels
2,18,19
        . More importantly, these types of cameras rely on standard CMOS technology, thus are relative low-
cost, have limited footprint and do not require complex optical systems or sophisticated control electronics.
A critical difference in this IFC modality is that bio-inspired sparsity (spike encoding) can potentially
reduce the volume of data generated during measurement.
Another critical step in IFC involves the data processing techniques employed after data capture. In this
context, requirements vary depending on the specific IFC installation. For example, generic microfluidics
permit multiple particles in the field of view, necessitating the use of object tracking algorithms20. In
addition, the acquisition speed and resolution of the generated signal (frame rate and pixel count), impose
additional restriction on the size of the following neural network and on the associated processing latency.
A plethora of neural network architectures have been proposed so as to efficiently tackle the aforementioned
requirements, ranging from convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
and deep neural networks (DNNs)21,22. Each of these neural network implementations is adapted to the IFC,
offering a diverse mix of advantages and disadvantages in terms of complexity, accuracy, and latency.
However, features such as a limited number of floating-point operations (FLOPs), low latency, low power
consumption and FPGA compatibility are considered critical for efficient, real-time and handheld IFCs. In
all cases, an increased data volume generated by the IFC modality leads to a higher parameter count in the
neural network, which in turn results in unavoidably higher power consumption and latency during neural
network training.
In this work, we realize a low-cost, compact, light emitting diode (LED) based IFC scheme built around a
CMOS neuromorphic camera, capable of capturing up to 1Gevents/sec with µs-range temporal resolution,
delivering an equivalent of 100 kframes/sec17. In this case, the IFC signals correspond to asynchronous
electrical spikes, signifying individual pixel’s relative intensity changes (aka temporal contrast). The
developed IFC module utilizes a generic off-the-shelve microfluidic chip with a single straight channel,
without any sheath flow control mechanism. The IFC scenario realized was discriminating aqua solutions
of Polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) spheres of 12, 16 and 20μm in diameter. The generated electrical
spikes (events) were processed in two distinct ways: the first method involved direct processing using
lightweight machine-learning (ML) models, such as simple fully connected layers (FCLs) and compact
RNNs. This direct method yielded high classification accuracy, up to 97.6% and 98.6% for the optimal FCL
and RNN configurations, respectively. However, direct processing with FCLs required 30K trainable
parameters, and RNNs required 1M trainable parameters, alleviating the hardware requirements and power
consumption during training. The second approach adopts an unconventional path by transferring the IFC
signals into the optical domain, where they are pre-processed through a photonic neuromorphic scheme
utilizing an optical spectrum slicing (OSS) architecture23. The pre-processed outputs are then also fed into
a conventional digital FCL as above. In this scenario, the photonic neuromorphic pre-processor acts as an
analogue CNN accelerator, achieving an even higher classification accuracy of 98.6% compared to
standalone FCL. Additionally, this approach resulted in a significant reduction in the number of trainable
parameters in the FCL by a factor of >20. These experimental results validate that the combination of
neuromorphic sensing and processing can enhance accuracy and more importantly generate a massive
impact on the power consumption requirements of the overall IFC schemes.



Results
Neuromorphic Camera based IFC
The experimental IFC setup is
                                          (c)
depicted in Fig. 1a-b. The light                                                                    (a)
source is a simple LED emitting at
635 nm, chosen to simplify the
experimental       system     while
avoiding the generation of laser-                                 (b)
source, diffraction patterns that
could obscure the actual physical
features of the particles. Two
microscope       objectives    were
utilized to focus and collect light
into/from a generic microfluidic Figure 1. (a) Schematic of the proposed IFC: the neuromorphic camera
channel. The three classes of used is a Prophesee Gen4 sensor17. (b) The installed IFC. (c) Typical
particles tested were PMMA recorded synthetic frame depicting 20μm PMMA spheres flowing within
spheres with diameters of 12, 16, the microfluidic channel: polarity “1” and “0” corresponds to pixel
and 20 μm (refer to the Methods contrast increase and decrease respectively.
section for details). A steady flow was maintained in the channel with the aid of a vacuum pump, allowing
the particles to reach mean velocities ranging from 1 to 0.07 m/s, corresponding to an ideal particle flow
rate of 500 to 350 particles/s (assuming an ideal sequential flow of particles with no gaps between them).
However, the actual measured flow rate was limited to 10-15 particles/s, a limitation necessitated by the
need to significantly dilute the solutions to prevent clogging. The event-based camera (Prophesee Gen4
sensor) provided a spatial resolution of 640 x 480 pixels and a temporal resolution of 1 μs per pixel, resulting
in an equivalent capturing rate of 1 Gevents/sec17.

(a)
                                                                              (b)
                                                                                                       (c)




   Figure 2. (a) Data collection and lightweight pre-processing pipeline. (b) Total number of spikes across all 2D
 coordinates over time for a typical sample of 20 μm PMMA spheres. (c) Zoomed-in version of a single peak from
                                                        part b.

The lightweight data processing pipeline is illustrated in Figure 2. The Prophesee camera generates
asynchronous events – tuples that include the coordinates, a timestamp, and a binary polarity signifying
whether the pixel contrast is triggered by an intensity increase or decrease (X, Y, t, P). In our case, we sum
all events per pixel (regardless of their polarity), over an integration time (T) to generate I(X,Y). The choice
of T depends on the speed of the particles and is linked to the number of events per frame; meaning that for
a fast-moving sphere, a low value of T would result in too few events per synthetic frame, thus a lower
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Conversely, a high value of T obscures the recording of the fine spatial features
of the particles, similar to motion blur. To compute the optimum T for our setup, we recorded the total
number of spiking events over time (see Fig. 2b). This measurement is performed once, and the particles’
flow is represented by individual peaks over time. Fig. 2b facilitates the extraction of two key observations.
  The first concerns the duration of each peak, which remains consistent across all recorded peaks, regardless
  of their amplitude, and corresponds to the time needed for each object to enter and exit the IFC’s field of
  view (Fig. 2c). Therefore, the rise time of these peaks can provide an estimate of the optimum integration
  window (T) for the specific vacuum pump setting; in our case, T was set to 3 ms (Fig. 2c). The second
  observation is that the peaks’ amplitude (number of events) varies, with several peaks observed in Fig. 2b
  having a significantly low number of events (<50). These peaks do not correspond to actual PMMA
  particles but are debris or air bubbles contaminating the PMMA mixture, evident in all samples. Therefore,
  a unified criterion of rejecting events with a low event count (<100) has been used throughout all
  measurements.
(a)                                        (b)                                    (c)




(d)                                        (e)                                     (f)




      Figure 3: a-c: Images of microfluidic channels from different experimental instances, showing variations in width
       (in pixels) due to minor misalignments. d-f: Histograms of the distribution of particle widths, normalized to the
      width of the corresponding channel for each particle class: d) PMMA spheres of 12 μm diameter, e) 16 μm, and f)
                                                            20 μm.

  Interestingly, the information in I follows a rate-encoding scheme, where pixels with a high spike count
  correspond to spatial locations subjected to strong activity (Fig. 2a). Furthermore, considering we did not
  choose a sophisticated microfluidic channel; the particles do not flow in a single file but exhibit diverse
  trajectories. This led us to the use of an object tracking algorithm. To preserve the simplicity of the pre-
  processing stage, we utilized a straightforward centre of mass computation, involving only the summation
  of the synthetic frame's rows and columns (see fig.2a). By locating the centre of each particle, we cropped
  the dimensions of the synthetic frame to 100x100 pixels. Based on this pipeline, 4378 unique synthetic
  frames were captured/generated, not equally divided among the three classes: 1216 particles correspond to
  20 μm spheres, 1811 to 16 μm, and 1351 to the 12 μm class. A critical issue in IFC data processing, as
  raised in 24, is related to whether experimental bias can influence the accuracy of ML schemes; specifically,
  if measurements of two particle classes are performed under different experimental conditions, then the
  ML's accuracy might reflect these experimental biases rather than the inherent differences between the two
  classes. To avoid this pitfall, we recorded data through multiple experimental instances (on different days,
  using different microfluidic channels-replaced due to clogging), ensuring multiple classes were recorded in
  each instance. In Fig. 3a-c, images from three typical microfluidic channels used in different instances are
  presented. It is evident that minor positioning errors among instances can affect the IFC magnification
  factor (width of channel in pixels). To address this, we normalized each synthetic frame's spatial features
  (measured in pixels) to the width of each microfluidic channel used. In Fig. 3d-f, normalized particle size
histograms for the three classes are presented; each class exhibits a distinguishable mean value
(𝑚!"#$%& = 0.25 ± 0.04, 𝑚!"'(%& = 0.17 ± 0.02 and 𝑚!"'#%& = 0.14 ± 0.016), while significant
overlap between the three distributions is observed. This implies that even after data normalization, the
classification task remains challenging, necessitating an ML model.


Digital Machine Learning IFC
In this direction, we focused primarily on FPGA-compatible and lightweight ML models. A subset of the
dataset was randomly chosen to equalize the number of samples per class. Therefore, 1216 unique samples
per class were used, of which 70% were used for the training of each model and 30% for testing. All ML
models were implemented on the TensorFlow framework25 by a graphics processing unit (GPU) alongside
an Adam Optimizer26 with a learning rate of 0.01 and categorical cross-entropy as the loss function. The
model training process involved data processed in batches of 250 for a maximum of 500 epochs. To prevent
overfitting, an early-stopping callback was implemented to monitor validation loss, maintaining a validation
split of 10% during training (see Methods). The architectures used here include a fully connected network
with 1 and 2 layers. In Table I, we present the accuracy and the number of trainable parameters for the
lightest neural network configuration employed: a single layer consisting of 3 perceptron nodes, each
equipped with a rectified linear unit (ReLU) activation function. The optimum performance without digital
pre-processing emerged when the synthetic frames are directly used as input (97.5%), requiring 60,000
FLOPs. In an approach to boost performance, we also utilized a digital pre-processing technique tailored
for image processing such as Histogram of Gradients (HoG)27. In this case, accuracy marginally increased
to 98% while FLOPs were reduced to 26,000. Nonetheless, these benefits come with the subtle cost of
additional digital pre-processing of the original data. In particular, HoG entails the computation of the
magnitude and the angle of each pixel’s contrast to its adjustment pixels row/column wise, thus in this case
leads to a minimum of 105 additional computations during pre-processing27. It is worth mentioning that
each synthetic frames’ intensity histograms (used to extract Fig. 3) was used as input to the same neural
network. This approach can act as basic benchmark of accuracy/complexity. In this context, although
histograms require an extremely low number of parameters (303), their performance tops at only 90%,
confirming that the IFC classification is not a trivial task.

               Table I: Performance of a single layer feedforward neural network for raw
                                     events, histograms and HoG
                                           Best Accuracy        Trainable
                        Metric                                                    FLOPS
                                                (%)            Parameters
                  Synthetic Frames
                                                 97.5             30,003           60,001
                     (100,100)
                  Histogram (100)                 90               303              601
                    HoG (66,66)                   98              13,071           26,137

Aiming to further boost performance, we use a feedforward neural network with an additional dense layer.
In Table II, we present performance metrics including accuracy, number of trainable parameters and power
consumption, using the thermal design power (TDP) for each network. For each metric, we compute two
values: one for the ML model with the fewest parameters (highlighted in bold) and another for the model
providing the best performance in terms of accuracy (indicated in regular font). Using a compact 2-FCL
network with only 6 hidden nodes achieves a performance of 97.9%. However, increasing the FCL
parameters radically to 46 hidden nodes yields only a minor improvement of 0.3%, with an accuracy of
98.2%. Similar to the single FCL case, the highest accuracy is achieved through HoG pre-processing
(98.3%), which halves the number of trainable parameters but requires more complex data pre-processing,
as mentioned above. The best overall performance, a 98.7% accuracy, is again achieved with HoG and 2
FCLs. Interestingly, the accuracy boost when using a two-layer FCL network over a single-layer perceptron
is marginal. For example, the accuracy increases from 97.5% to 98.2% for synthetic frames used as direct
input and is accompanied by a significant rise in FLOPs, from 30K to 900K.

    Table II: Performance of a 2-FCL neural network. The metrics in bold correspond to the most
    lightweight network in terms of parameters and the metrics in regular font to the optimum network
    in term of performance. In the last column the number of nodes at the hidden layer and the type of
    non-linear activation function used are presented.
                                                                         Thermal
                       Accuracy       Trainable                                           Optimum
         Metric                                         FLOPS              Design
                          (%)        Parameters                                        nodes/function
                                                                         Power %
       Synthetic
                                        60,027 /                                           6, relu /
        Frames         97.9/98.2                    120,038/920,278 15.1/19.4
                                        460,187                                            46, relu
       (100,100)
                                        34,883 /                                           8, tanh /
     HoG (66,66)       98.3/98.7                    69,746 / 401,030 11.3/16.9
                                        200,563                                            46, tanh


Photonic Neuromorphic Pre-Processor for IFC
a) Numerical Simulations

As shown in the results above, input pre-processing (e.g., HoG) is a potential path towards further increasing
accuracy, without massively affecting the number of trainable parameters. On the other hand, digital pre-
processing introduces additional computations, thus impacting power consumption during inference.
Aiming to circumvent this impediment, we pursue an alternative approach, where input signals are pre-
processed directly in the optical/analogue domain. In particular, we utilize a neuromorphic photonic scheme
that will alleviate the additional computational workload associated with digital feature extraction
techniques28,29, while at the same time, off-loading part of the back-end computational complexity, allowing
for slimmer digital back-end ML models. In this context, our group proposed a photonic accelerator, relying
on a hardware-friendly optical spectrum slicing (OSS) technique23. This approach involves the utilization
of multiple passive optical filters acting in parallel as convolutional neural nodes. Each OSS node monitors
distinct spectral regions of the input optical signal and applies a complex kernel filter directly in the
analogue domain without any need for digital processing. This scheme was successfully applied to the field
of high-speed image processing, where the OSS has offered performance levels comparable to fully digital
sophisticated architectures23. More importantly, OSS, when targeting datasets such as the MNIST, offered
a significant reduction in the number of trainable parameters and consequently to the overall power
consumption. The fact that recurrent versions of the OSS have been also tested in transmission impairment
mitigation in high baud rate optical communications further solidifies the capabilities of this approach as a
ML accelerator30. On the other hand, OSS has been only recently combined with real-life datasets and, in
particular, with medical imaging modalities such as IFC21. Here, we aim to combine the efficiency of a
neuromorphic camera with photonic neuromorphic pre-processing for the first time, so as to enhance the
IFC’s capabilities overall.
   Figure 4: Conversion of synthetic frames to 1D vectors for OSS processing. Each frame is serialized into a 1D
     vector by processing blocks of pixel values (patches) in two orientations: row-wise and column-wise (see
                                                    Methods).
Before implementing the OSS scheme, synthetic frames are converted into 1D vectors, as depicted in Figure
4. This conversion involves serializing each block of pixel values (patch) in two orientations—row-wise
and column-wise. Both orientations are used in the 1D representation of each synthetic frame to enhance
their spectro-temporal characteristics (see Methods section). The key components of the OSS scheme are
illustrated in Figure 5. The 1D vectors of each synthetic frame are transferred to the optical domain by
modulating the amplitude of a continuous-wave optical carrier through a digital-to-analog converter (DAC)
and an electro-optic modulator, such as a Mach-Zehnder Modulator (MZM). The processing core comprises
multiple bandpass optical filters. Operation wise, the application of the filter's transfer function in the
frequency domain is identical to the convolution of the signal with the filter's impulse response in the
temporal domain. Therefore, each OSS node is set at a different central frequency, facilitating the "slicing"
of distinct regions of the optical signal. This results in a change in the impulse response of each filter and
the application of varying complex weights to the input time-traces23. Unlike digital kernels, the control
over the complex weights is coarsely adjusted through the filter's hyperparameters, which shape the impulse
response of the OSS filters, such as central frequency (fm), bandwidth (fc) etc. (red and green insets of Figure
5). Furthermore, the filters can act as tunable optical integrators31, where the integration time is governed
through tuning the filters' bandwidth and order. The integration time in this scenario is equivalent to the
receptive field; meaning the number of spatial pixels’ values that are linked during convolution.
Following this purely optical step, the time-traces are transferred back to the electrical domain through a
photodiode (PD) and an analog-to-digital converter (ADC) that follows each filter. The PDs introduce an
elementwise nonlinear transformation at the filter outputs through their square-law characteristics.
Furthermore, by reducing the bandwidth of the PDs or equivalently by integrating the PDs' output, an
average-pooling-like operation is performed. The extent of this integration can be controlled through Eq.
2, where the PD's 3 dB bandwidth is set according to the pixel rate (modulation rate at the MZM) of the
input signal (PR) and the size of the patch. This is defined by dividing the synthetic frame into square blocks
of 𝑀 × 𝑀 pixels.
                                                     )+
                                          𝐵𝑊)* =                              (2)
                                                    ,-,
Towards the same direction, the sampling rate (SR) of the ADCs can be used to further compress data by
under-sampling the output. The digitized samples at the output of the OSS are subsequently flattened and
fed to a simple digital back-end comprising a lightweight digital FCL with 1 or 2 dense layers, identical to
the ones presented above. It is worth mentioning that the number of nodes in the FCL and thus the trainable
parameters are directly governed by the number of samples that are generated and fed to the back-end.
                                             (c)
                                                                                    (e)

                              (a)




                      (b)
                                                (d)



                                                                                    (f)
 Figure 5: Schematic diagram of the OSS-CNN for the classification of IFC experimental data. (a) The synergy of a
 continuous-wave laser, a DAC and an MZM, used to imprint the 1D synthetic frame vectors onto the amplitude of
    the optical carrier. (b) A flattened IFC synthetic frame after laser modulation, displayed alongside the original
 synthetic frame. (c-d) Complex-valued coefficients (I/Q) for two identical filters, positioned at different detunings
   relative to the signal's carrier frequency. (e-f) Reconstructed images after processing through two discrete OSS
                                                          nodes.

Towards validating the concept, the first step consists of numerically simulating the OSS scheme so as to
determine the optimum hyperparameters that would maximize classification accuracy. In this case, the OSS
nodes are implemented as first-order bandpass Butterworth filters that can be easily realized using
conventional photonic structures (e.g micro-ring resonators-MRRs). The system's hyperparameters under
examination included the patch size (𝑀 × 𝑀), stride, number of OSS nodes and OSS filter characteristics
(𝑓. , 𝑓& ). Initially, optical input was assumed to be injected to the filters at a pixel rate of 100 GS/s, with an
average input power of 20 mW; a typical optical spectrum and time-trace of a particle are shown in Figures
6b and 6a, respectively. Subsequently, the optical signal was split equally to feed the OSS nodes with a
1xN splitter, where nodes range from 1 to 10. In Figure 6c, three typical filter responses are depicted at
different frequencies, "slicing" the spectrum of the input signal. The bandwidth of the PDs was adjusted in
accordance with the selected patch size, as defined in Eq.2, while the sampling rate of the ADCs was
modified to extract only two samples over the temporal duration of a single patch.
 (a)                                                       (b)




                              (c)




Figure 6: (a) Time trace at the output of the DAC corresponding to the 1-D vector of a 12 μm cell, (b) Optical power
   spectrum of the signal modulated by the vector of the 12 μm cell and (c) Power transfer functions of three OSS
filters with a 12 GHz 3-dB bandwidth, designed for uniform segmentation of the right-sideband spectrum within the
                                                input optical signal.


The generated digital samples were fed to a single FCL identical to the digital scenario described above.
The key differentiation in this approach lies in the preliminary optimization phase. Prior to classification,
we employed the 'Optuna'32 hyperparameter optimization framework to systematically identify the optimal
values for the OSS scheme in this task (bandwidth, central frequency and patch size).




 Figure 7: Classification accuracy of a numerically simulated OSS-CNN with one (red circles) and two FCLs (blue
 circles) across varying OSS nodes, compared to standalone one-layer (red dashed line) and two-layer FCL models
                                                 (blue dashed line).
The hyperparameter scan revealed that using a 20x20 pixel patch with a 10-pixel stride, during the
conversion of 2D image data to a 1D format for OSS processing, yielded optimal results. Figure 7
graphically illustrates the performance of two OSS-CNN configurations—comprising one and two FCLs—
against the number of OSS nodes utilized. For context, the standalone performances of both single and
dual-layer digital FCL models are included for direct comparison, depicted by red and blue dashed lines,
respectively. In particular, utilizing a single OSS node, with a filter 3dB bandwidth (𝑓& ) of 11 GHz and a
central frequency detuning (𝑓. ) of 19 GHz, testing accuracy reached as high as 96.4%. Adding just one
more OSS node—adjusting 𝑓& to 16 and 37 GHz for each filter, with 𝑓. set to 8 GHz—enhanced
classification accuracy to 97.9%, slightly surpassing the standalone single-layer FCL model's performance
by 0.4% (see Table I). A similar accuracy level was also achieved in the cases that node number increased
to 3-5. Further exploration with a two-layer FCL classifier, as indicated by the Optuna framework, included
80 nodes in the digital hidden layer with a ReLU activation. This setup showed a notable improvement,
where the single-node OSS scheme’s accuracy boosted to 98.5%, compared to 98.2% for the purely digital
approach. The highest accuracy achieved with the OSS-assisted scheme was 98.6% with two optical nodes,
though an increase in the number of OSS nodes beyond three resulted in a slight decline in performance,
likely due to overfitting. Overfitting here arises when more than three OSS nodes are used, due to increase
in the model’s parameters.
From a first glance, the inclusion of a fully analogue accelerator in this case, does not provide a strong
performance boost as in 23 but still improves testing accuracy by 0.5%. However, the key advantage of
integrating OSS lies in its impact on reducing the number of trainable parameters, a critical factor in
minimizing power consumption during model training. Table III provides a detailed comparison of OSS
configurations (with one and two FCL layers) against purely digital neural network models, including the
standalone single-layer and double-layer feedforward neural networks described above and a sophisticated
yet parameter-efficient gated recurrent unit RNN (GRU-RNN). It highlights the differences in classification
accuracy, the number of trainable parameters and the number of hidden units for each architecture.
                 Table III: Comparison of Different Digital Neural Network
                 Architectures of the Event-Based Data
                                    Hidden
                 Architectures                      Parameters              Accuracy
                                     units
                     1 FCL              -              30003                  97.5%
                    2 FCLs             46              460187                 98.2%
                  OSS-1FCL              -               1947                  97.9%
                  OSS-2FCL             80              52163                  98.6%
                  GRU-RNN              38             1144677                 98.6%

The results of Table III underscore that the OSS was able to achieve a classification precision higher
compared to simple FCLs and identical to the more complex GRU-RNN architectures. This is particularly
noteworthy since the OSS-2FCL configuration operates with significantly fewer trainable parameters,
approximately 8, 15 times lower compared to 1-FCL and 2-FCL respectively, whereas versus the complex
RNN, OSS offers a strong parameter reduction by a factor of 22, without any performance degradation.
This key property, similar to 23, can be attributed to the CNN-like architecture of the OSS system.
Specifically, the slicing process by multiple filters performs a convolutional operation, where the kernel is
roughly dictated by the transfer function and position of each filter’s response. This process extracts
multiple diverse features from the original data, which are also integrated by the filter’s integrational
property. Additionally, these rich, information-wise features undergo a nonlinear transformation through
the PD, which is also set to average these values over the temporal duration of a patch (see Eq.2).
Consequently, the number of samples delivered to the input of the back-end classifier for each synthetic
frame is significantly reduced, corresponding to two samples per patch as determined by the sampling rate
of the post-nodal ADCs.

b) Experimental Validation of OSS assisted IFC

The aforementioned concept was experimentally validated, as depicted in the schematic diagram of Figure
8. The setup included a tunable laser (CoBrite-DX Tunable Laser) amplitude-modulated through a 20 GS/s
arbitrary waveform generator (AWG) (Tektronix AWG70002B) and a Mach-Zehnder modulator (MZM)
(iXblue MXIQ-LN-30) with a 20 GHz 3-dB bandwidth. Subsequently, the modulated signal was directed
to an optical waveshaper (Coherent WaveShaper-1000A Programmable Optical Filter), acting as a
Butterworth filter with a 3-dB bandwidth around 10 GHz, centred at 1552.6 nm, realizing a single OSS
node. The optical output was captured by a 10 GHz photoreceiver (Thorlabs RXM10AF) connected to a 50
GS/s digital signal oscilloscope (OSC) (Tektronix DPO75002SX). The final digital signal was resampled
to 20GS/s to match the rate of the AWG and was filtered using a digital low-pass filter to implement an
operation akin to average pooling. The final step involves classification using a digital dense feedforward
neural network, identical to the one used in the numerical simulations described above.




  Figure 8: Schematic diagram of the OSS-CNN experimental setup. The setup includes a tunable laser, a 20 GS/s
 AWG, and an MZM. The signal is then boosted by an EDFA to enhance SNR and sent to a waveshaper. Detection
and analysis are conducted with a 50 GS/s OSC. Post-processing is performed using a DLPF and classification via a
                                                     FCL.


The data pre-processing pipeline was slightly modified compared to the numerical simulations, aiming to
reduce the number of samples processed by the AWG due to time constraints. In this approach, we took the
original 100x100 pixel frames and divided them into smaller, 4x4 pixel blocks. By calculating the average
value of each 4x4 block, we effectively compressed the frame into a smaller, 25x25 pixel frame, reducing
the overall data. Therefore, the compressed frames were then transformed into 1D vectors using 5x5 patches
and a stride of 2. To increase the SNR of the optical signal and assess the system's capabilities when not
limited by thermal/shot noise during detection, an Erbium-Doped Fiber Amplifier (EDFA) was used prior
to the waveshaper to boost the optical power to 8 dBm. To simplify the experimental setup and facilitate
the recording of a single trace at a time, the optical convolution process at the waveshaper was performed
sequentially. Specifically, the filter response of the waveshaper was maintained constant at 193.22 THz
(1552.6 nm), while to implement multiple OSS nodes, the central frequency of the laser source was detuned
relative to the central frequency of the filter. The carrier frequency was adjusted in 1 GHz steps, ranging
from -9 GHz to +9 GHz, allowing for the exploration of 19 distinct filter central frequencies. Figure 9a
shows a segment of a normalized time trace corresponding to a 12 μm particle as sent to the AWG. In
Figure 9b, the resulting outputs for two different filter-carrier detunings (-6 and +1 GHz), as captured by
the oscilloscope, are presented. The variation in frequency detuning led to distinct outputs, highlighting the
optical filter's differential interaction with the signal's spectral components.
                              (a)                                                        (b)




Figure 9: (a) Temporal segment of the normalized event-vector time trace from the AWG corresponding to a 12 μm
cell. (b) Normalized outputs for two distinct filter detunings from the carrier frequency at the OSC, specifically at -6
                     GHz (red) and +1 GHz (green), applied to the input signal depicted in (a).


After photodetection, the signal from the oscilloscope was resampled at a rate of 20 GS/s to align with the
AWG’s output rate. The number of consecutive samples subjected to averaging was then adjusted based on
the bandwidth of the following LPF, as per Eq.2, leading to varying degrees of compression at the output
of the OSS system. The compression ratio (CR) serves as a metric that demonstrates the level of
compression, compared to the input, applied at the OSS accelerator's output. It is defined as the ratio of the
initial data size to the size of the digital outputs of the OSS nodes per dataset sample. For this experimental
setup, the compression ratio can be calculated using the formula:
                                                          /
                                                 𝐶𝑅 =   #/!
                                                                            (3)

where 𝑁0 is the number of distinct filter positions contributing to the inputs for the FCL and N is the integer
denoting the number of successive samples involved in the averaging process. The averaged outputs from
all particle samples were then merged to construct the optical pre-processed version of the original dataset.
The classification process began with analyzing the digitized outputs from each filter position, thereby
examining the performance when a single OSS node was used for pre-processing under various averaging
scenarios. Subsequently, the back-end FCL was supplied with combinations of outputs from 2, 3, and 5
different OSS nodes, thereby implementing an expanded OSS scheme. Figure 10 illustrates the mean
classification accuracy for the optimal combination of two distinct filter positions (optimum found to be -1
and 0 GHz from the carrier) with a single-layer FCL as the digital classifier. This is compared alongside
the performance of the optimal simulated 2-node OSS (solid-blue line), in relation to the CR. Additionally,
Fig. 10 presents the accuracy of the standalone digital FCL processing the entire synthetic frame dataset
(black dashed line) and the accuracy from a time trace derived from an uncompressed synthetic frame
without any OSS node intervention (red dashed line). Here, "mean accuracy" refers to the average
classification accuracy obtained over ten iterations of the same 3-neuron FCL model, where the only
difference across iterations was the initial values of the weights, with all the other training parameters
remaining constant. From Fig. 10, it is evident that the performance of the experimental OSS setup is similar
to that of the simulated OSS. The highest accuracy recorded in the experimental setup was 98.1% at a CR
of 3.3, underscoring the efficacy of OSS by enhancing accuracy by 0.6% over a system without noise, while
concurrently reducing the number of trainable parameters by a factor of 3.3. Another significant observation
from Fig. 10 is the robustness of OSS pre-processing, which sustains nearly 96% accuracy even under
substantial compression (96.1% with a CR of 20).




   Figure 10: Mean classification accuracy for the optimal 2-node experimental OSS configuration, utilizing filters
 detuned by -1 and 0 GHz, paired with a 1-FCL classifier, in comparison to a simulated 2-node OSS as a function of
the CR. For reference, the accuracy of a standalone FCL is shown (black dashed lines), alongside the mean accuracy
  from the uncompressed output of a wideband (25 GHz) filter aligned with the carrier frequency (red dashed lines)
                                                  are also presented.

In Figure 11, the mean precision of the experimental OSS-CNN is plotted against the number of OSS nodes
(filter positions), considering a single-layer FCL (Fig. 11a) and a dual-layer FCL backend (Fig. 11b), with
the CR held constant at 3.3. The figure also compares the classification accuracy of the simulated lossless
OSS at the same CR and the accuracy achieved by digital single-layer and dual-layer FCLs without OSS
pre-processing. From Fig. 11a, the accuracy trend of the experimental setup is shown to be similar to the
simulated OSS, demonstrating comparable or higher accuracy than the standalone digital FCL when more
than two OSS nodes are used. Notably, the highest accuracy achieved experimentally is 98.1% with three
nodes, surpassing the single-layer digital FCL despite the experimental system being subject to noise
(photodetection, EDFA etc.). The experimental OSS system's robustness is evident in its ability to maintain
a precision level above 97% with 1, 2 and 3 nodes. Fig. 11b reveals that incorporating a second dense layer
in the digital backend enhances accuracy across all cases compared to Fig. 11a. The peak accuracy for the
experimental OSS was 98.4% with 1-2 OSS nodes, marginally lower than the 98.6% peak performance of
the simulated OSS. The experimental setup's overall performance slightly declines across node
configurations, highlighting the influence of additional experimental parameters, most notably in the 2-
node case where mean accuracy dips to 97.6%, compared to 98.6% in the simulated system. Interestingly,
in the 1-2 OSS nodes configurations, the optimal experimental OSS surpasses the dual-layer digital FCL
while also significantly reducing the number of trainable parameters.
                              (a)                                                       (b)




Figure 11: Mean classification accuracy of the experimental OSS versus the number of nodes used with: (a) a single-
   layer (1-FCL) and (b) a two-layer (2-FCL) digital back end. As a reference, the classification accuracies of the
  numerically simulated lossless OSS and the maximum accuracies achieved by the standalone noiseless FCL with
                                  one and two layers are included for comparison.

Discussion and Conclusion
In this work, experimental data from a neuromorphic event based IFC system have been recorded, regarding
the classification of aqua solution of PMMA particles with different diameter. The generated datasets
comprise rate-encoded synthetic frames subject to a lightweight pre-processing, mainly consisting of object
tracking, to compensate for the utilization of a generic micro-fluidic system. Classification of the IFC data
has been performed in three ways: lightweight digital feedforward neural networks, offering a classification
accuracy of 98.2% comparable to 2, but requiring more than 460K trainable parameters. The second
approach consisted of using digital pre-processing of the dataset, following the well-established HoG
algorithm; offering topping accuracy at 98.7% with 200K parameters during training and with the additional
digital processing cost during inference. The third route replaces the HoG algorithm with an all-optical
convolution-like photonic neuromorphic scheme, based on optical spectrum slicing; this route offloads the
pre-processing to the analogue domain while the same feed-forward neural networks are used as back-end.
In this work this concept has been validated both experimentally and numerically and it offered an optimum
accuracy of 98.6%. The most critical attribute of the proposed scheme is that this performance is achieved
with only a fraction of trainable parameters demanded by standalone digital neural networks and without
any type of computationally intensive digital preprocessing. Thus, reducing power consumption both during
inference and training. These improvements stem from the ability of the OSS to inherently correlate pixel
information and apply random, yet complex kernels directly in the analogue domain. This in turn, evokes
a coarse projection of image’s features to a higher dimensional space, like a reservoir computing scheme,
thus simplifies classification by a lightweight digital neural network. On the other hand, the proposed IFC
entails an additional electro-optic conversion step that is not present in standalone digital solutions. This
conversion step is a necessity in all photonic accelerators33,34, whereas for the explicitly OSS it has been
shown that the power consumption of the electro-optics is lower compared to the energy-footprint of the
digital back end. In addition, this step can be omitted if an inherently photonic IFC detector is employed as
in 12. Overall, the results in this work confirm that by matching neuromorphic sensing with neuromorphic
processing an overall performance enhancement can be achieved outperforming all previous schemes,
whereas offering a strong reduction in terms of trainable parameters by a factor >20 that is of utmost
importance for emerging machine learning modalities.

References
1. Barteneva, N. S., Fasler-Kan, E. & Vorobjev, I. A. Imaging Flow Cytometry: Coping with

    Heterogeneity in Biological Systems. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 60, 723–733 (2012).

2. Gouda, M. et al. Improving the Classification Accuracy in Label-Free Flow Cytometry Using Event-

    Based Vision and Simple Logistic Regression. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 29, 1–8 (2023).

3. Blasi, T. et al. Label-free cell cycle analysis for high-throughput imaging flow cytometry. Nat.

    Commun. 7, 10256 (2016).

4. Rane, A. S., Rutkauskaite, J., deMello, A. & Stavrakis, S. High-Throughput Multi-parametric

    Imaging Flow Cytometry. Chem 3, 588–602 (2017).

5. Zhang, F. et al. Intelligent Image De‐Blurring for Imaging Flow Cytometry. Cytometry A 95, 549–

    554 (2019).

6. Isozaki, A. et al. Intelligent image-activated cell sorting 2.0. Lab. Chip 20, 2263–2273 (2020).

7. Vembadi, A., Menachery, A. & Qasaimeh, M. A. Cell Cytometry: Review and Perspective on

    Biotechnological Advances. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 7, 147 (2019).

8. Rožanc, J., Finšgar, M. & Maver, U. Progressive use of multispectral imaging flow cytometry in

    various research areas. The Analyst 146, 4985–5007 (2021).

9. Doan, M. et al. Diagnostic Potential of Imaging Flow Cytometry. Trends Biotechnol. 36, 649–652

    (2018).

10. Rodrigues, M. A. et al. The in vitro micronucleus assay using imaging flow cytometry and deep

    learning. Npj Syst. Biol. Appl. 7, 20 (2021).

11. Lau, A. K. S., Shum, H. C., Wong, K. K. Y. & Tsia, K. K. Optofluidic time-stretch imaging – an

    emerging tool for high-throughput imaging flow cytometry. Lab. Chip 16, 1743–1756 (2016).

12. Tsilikas, I. et al. Time-Stretched Imaging Flow Cytometry and Photonic Neuromorphic Processing

    for Particle Classification. in 2023 Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics Europe & European

    Quantum Electronics Conference (CLEO/Europe-EQEC) 1–1 (IEEE, Munich, Germany, 2023).

    doi:10.1109/CLEO/Europe-EQEC57999.2023.10232590.

13. Coddington, I., Newbury, N. & Swann, W. Dual-comb spectroscopy. Optica 3, 414 (2016).
14. Mizuno, T. et al. Optical image amplification in dual-comb microscopy. Sci. Rep. 10, 8338 (2020).

15. Lei, C. et al. High-throughput imaging flow cytometry by optofluidic time-stretch microscopy. Nat.

    Protoc. 13, 1603–1631 (2018).

16. Kiester, A. S., Ibey, B. L., Coker, Z. N., Pakhomov, A. G. & Bixler, J. N. Strobe photography

    mapping of cell membrane potential with nanosecond resolution. Bioelectrochemistry 142, 107929

    (2021).

17. Perot, E., de Tournemire, P., Nitti, D., Masci, J. & Sironi, A. Learning to Detect Objects with a 1

    Megapixel Event Camera. in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems vol. 33 16639–

    16652 (Curran Associates, Inc., 2020).

18. Abreu, S., Gouda, M., Lugnan, A. & Bienstman, P. Flow cytometry with event-based vision and

    spiking neuromorphic hardware. in 2023 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern

    Recognition Workshops (CVPRW) 4139–4147 (IEEE, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2023).

    doi:10.1109/CVPRW59228.2023.00435.

19. Tsilikas, I. et al. Neuromorphic Camera Assisted High-Flow Imaging Cytometry for Particle

    Classification. in 2023 Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics Europe & European Quantum

    Electronics Conference (CLEO/Europe-EQEC) 1–1 (IEEE, Munich, Germany, 2023).

    doi:10.1109/CLEO/Europe-EQEC57999.2023.10232061.

20. Zhang, Z. et al. Work in Progress: Neuromorphic Cytometry, High-throughput Event-based flow

    Flow-Imaging. in 2022 8th International Conference on Event-Based Control, Communication, and

    Signal Processing (EBCCSP) 1–5 (IEEE, Krakow, Poland, 2022).

    doi:10.1109/EBCCSP56922.2022.9845595.

21. Tsirigotis, A., Tsilikas, I., Sozos, K., Bogris, A. & Mesaritakis, C. Photonic Neuromorphic

    Accelerator Combined with an Event-Based Neuromorphic Camera for High-Speed Object

    Classification. in 2023 Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics Europe & European Quantum

    Electronics Conference (CLEO/Europe-EQEC) 1–1 (IEEE, Munich, Germany, 2023).

    doi:10.1109/CLEO/Europe-EQEC57999.2023.10232077.
22. Haessig, G., Berthelon, X., Ieng, S.-H. & Benosman, R. A Spiking Neural Network Model of Depth

    from Defocus for Event-based Neuromorphic Vision. Sci. Rep. 9, 3744 (2019).

23. Tsirigotis, A. et al. Unconventional Integrated Photonic Accelerators for High-Throughput

    Convolutional Neural Networks. Intell. Comput. 2, 0032 (2023).

24. Lugnan, A., Gooskens, E., Vatin, J., Dambre, J. & Bienstman, P. Machine learning issues and

    opportunities in ultrafast particle classification for label-free microflow cytometry. Sci. Rep. 10,

    20724 (2020).

25. TensorFlow. https://www.tensorflow.org/.

26. Kingma, D. P. & Ba, J. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. Preprint at

    https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1412.6980 (2017).

27. Dalal, N. & Triggs, B. Histograms of Oriented Gradients for Human Detection. in 2005 IEEE

    Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR’05) vol. 1 886–

    893 (IEEE, San Diego, CA, USA, 2005).

28. Li, Y. et al. Deep Cytometry: Deep learning with Real-time Inference in Cell Sorting and Flow

    Cytometry. Sci. Rep. 9, 11088 (2019).

29. Yu, H., Yang, L. T., Zhang, Q., Armstrong, D. & Deen, M. J. Convolutional neural networks for

    medical image analysis: State-of-the-art, comparisons, improvement and perspectives.

    Neurocomputing 444, 92–110 (2021).

30. Sozos, K. et al. High-speed photonic neuromorphic computing using recurrent optical spectrum

    slicing neural networks. Commun. Eng. 1, 1–10 (2022).

31. Ferrera, M. et al. On-chip CMOS-compatible all-optical integrator. Nat. Commun. 1, 29 (2010).

32. Akiba, T., Sano, S., Yanase, T., Ohta, T. & Koyama, M. Optuna: A Next-generation Hyperparameter

    Optimization Framework. in Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on

    Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining 2623–2631 (Association for Computing Machinery, New

    York, NY, USA, 2019). doi:10.1145/3292500.3330701.
33. Xu, X. et al. 11 TOPS photonic convolutional accelerator for optical neural networks. Nature 589,

    44–51 (2021).

34. Feldmann, J. et al. Parallel convolutional processing using an integrated photonic tensor core. Nature

    589, 52–58 (2021).

35. Keras: Deep Learning for humans. https://keras.io/.

36. TechPowerUp GPU-Z . https://www.techpowerup.com/gpuz/



Methods
Experimental Setup
The experimental setup features two 40x microscope objective (Marka) lenses with a numerical aperture
(NA) of 0.65 and a working distance of 600μm. These lenses are securely mounted on two 3-Axis
MicroBlock. Two planoconvex lenses with a focal length of 10cm are used before and after the objectives
so as to direct/collect light from the microscope system. The light source is a 635nm emitting LED with
average power of 5mW, whereas the recording event-based camera is Gen4 provided by Prophesee with a
resolution of 640x480 pixels and a temporal resolution in spike generation of 1μsec. The camera records
pixel’s contract changes with two polarity values, depending on whether there is an increase or decrease in
intensity. In this work, synthetic frames do not include this feature and all events are mapped to the synthetic
frame, independently of their polarity. A vacuum pump installed offered a steady liquid flow ranging from
10 μlit/hour to several ml/min thus, regulating the speed of the particles from 0.001m/sec to well beyond
1m/sec. In the experiments a particle speed of 0.07 m/sec was used. Finally, the microfluidic channels
employed, were straight channels based on TOPAS, offering absorption below <0.5dB at 635nm, having a
cross section of 100x100μm. The microfluidic scheme had no seethe control, thus particles propagated at
random trajectories within the cross-section.

Sample Preparation
The experiments involved three distinct categories of calibrated transparent PMMA spheres (POLYAN) of
different diameters 12, 16, and 20 μm. The initial concentration of calibrated transparent PMMA spheres
was 5% and it was further diluted to 1:200 by adding purified water. The low particle concentration was
used so as to avoid clogging in the microfluidic channel and reduce the probability of particle clustering.
All tubes and microfluidic chambers employed during dataset generation were used solely for one class to
avoid cross-contamination that would hinder labeling of the dataset. Prior to any measurement, all the
microfluidic channels were thoroughly cleaned by debris by injecting purified water at high flow.

Synthetic Frames to 1-D Vectors
In order to leverage the OSS optical preprocessing, synthetic frames are serialized using multiple spatial
orientations. Although this step does not require any digital preprocessing, it determines the order in which
pixels are inserted into the stream, thereby potentially augmenting input data. Specifically, it can generate
additional correlations among pixels when combined with a filter. The process consists of the following
steps: the values of the synthetic frame are divided into blocks of size 𝑀𝑥𝑀 pixels, where 𝑀 is equal to 20
in numerically simulated OSS and to 5 in experimental OSS (see Fig. 4). Each block is sequentially
serialized in two alignments: column-wise and row-wise. Both of these serialized forms are utilized in the
representation of each synthetic frame in a one-dimensional vector. The stride, defined as the step by which
the patch window shifts across the synthetic frame before serializing the next block, is employed in two
orientations. The first orientation is row-wise, serializing pixels within the patch based on horizontal
alignment, and the second is column-wise, focusing on vertical alignment of the patch pixels. Utilizing both
patch orientations aims to augment the spatio-temporal characteristics of each particle sample within its
one-dimensional representation. Consequently, the classification dataset comprises 4378 different one-
dimensional vectors, each representing a synthetic frame.

Machine Learning Training Process
The neural network models were formulated using the Keras API35 implemented on the Tensorflow
framework25, and their training and evaluation processes were conducted utilizing a graphical processing
unit (GPU). In all instances, 70% of the available data particles were designated for training, while 20%
out of these were reserved for validation to mitigate the risk of overfitting. The remaining 30% of the data
were allocated for evaluation to ensure a comprehensive and unbiased assessment of model performance.
The optimization algorithm selected for these models was Adam, with a fixed learning rate of 1×10-4 and
the training regimen was performed for 300 epochs. The architectural configurations encompassed a basic
digital perceptron, a fully connected network (FC) with 1-2 layers and lightweight recurrent neural networks
(RNN), instantiated as long-short term memory (LSTM), gated-recurrent unit (GRU) and Vanilla-RNN (V-
RNN).
To optimize hyperparameters, the 'Optuna' framework32, which utilizes a Tree-structured Parzen Estimator,
was employed to maximize the testing accuracy. A comprehensive evaluation of the aforementioned models
was undertaken, focusing on several factors: the number of hidden neurons, the learning rate and the batch
size within the FCs or the RNN models, as well as the activation function of the hidden nodes in the FC
layers.
The data delineated in Tables II and III encapsulate a robust array of computational characteristics,
including the number of parameters, FLOPS, and Thermal Design Power (TDP). The TDP represents the
maximum amount of heat a processing component, like a GPU is expected to generate under heavy loads,
where a lower TDP generally indicates reduced power consumption. These metrics were derived through
the application of TensorFlow libraries in conjunction with NVIDIA tools, ensuring precise and dependable
measurements critical for assessing and contrasting computational performance. In this analysis, an
NVIDIA 2080Ti GPU with a TDP of 250 Watts was utilized. The determination of the TDP percentage
was conducted using the GPU-Z monitoring utility36. The average TDU percentage was calculated over 100
training epochs for each neural network model.


Data availability
All codes generated for the emulation of the optical spectrum slicing concept are uploaded in repositories
alongside the processed synthetic frames from the cytometry experiments.


Competing interests (mandatory)
The authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
This work has received funding from the EU H2020 project NEoteRIC under grant agreement 871330
and by EU Horizon PROMETHEUS project under grant agreement 101070195.


Author contributions
I. T and C. M setup and conducted the cytometry experiments, C. M did the digital pre-processing on the
dataset, A. T performed the photonic pre-processor simulations and conducted the photonic machine
learning experiment with help from G.S and A.B. S. D analysed the data using digital machine learning for
benchmark reasons, K. P and G. B provided know-how and specifications on the event-based camera, A.B
and C.M initiated the activity and supervised the whole process. The manuscript has been prepared with
the help of all authors.
