                                        Embedded Graph Convolutional Networks for Real-Time Event Data Processing
                                                                    on SoC FPGAs

                                                            Kamil Jezioreka , Piotr Wzoreka , Krzysztof Blachuta , Andrea Pinnab , Tomasz Kryjaka
                                          a   Embedded Perception and Autonomous Systems Group, Department of Automatic Control and Robotics, AGH University of Krakow, Poland
                                                                                    b Sorbonne Universite, CNRS, LIP6, F-75005, Paris




                                        Abstract
arXiv:2406.07318v3 [cs.CV] 8 Jun 2026




                                            The utilisation of event cameras represents an important and swiftly evolving trend aimed at addressing the con-
                                        straints of traditional video systems. Particularly within the automotive domain, these cameras find significant rel-
                                        evance for their integration into embedded real-time systems due to lower latency and power consumption. One
                                        effective approach to ensure the necessary throughput and latency for event processing is through the utilisation of
                                        graph convolutional networks (GCNs). In this study, we introduce a custom EFGCN (Event-based FPGA-accelerated
                                        Graph Convolutional Network) designed with a series of hardware-aware optimisations tailored for PointNetConv,
                                        a graph convolution designed for point cloud processing. The proposed techniques result in up to 100-fold reduction
                                        in model size compared to Asynchronous Event-based GNN (AEGNN), one of the most recent works in the field, with
                                        a relatively small decrease in accuracy (2.9% for the N-Caltech101 classification task, 2.2% for the N-Cars classifi-
                                        cation task), thus following the TinyML trend. We implemented EFGCN on a ZCU104 SoC FPGA platform without
                                        any off-chip external memory resources, achieving a throughput of 13.3 million events per second (MEPS) and real-
                                        time partially asynchronous processing with low latency. Across multiple event-based classification benchmarks,
                                        our approach achieves competitive accuracy while providing state-of-the-art computational efficiency per event, small
                                        model size, and high scalability, customisability and resource efficiency. We publish both software and hardware
                                        source code in an open repository: https://github.com/vision-agh/gcnn-dvs-fpga.
                                        Keywords: Dynamic Vision Sensor, Graph Convolutional Neural Networks, Recognition, SoC FPGA


                                        1. Introduction

                                             Embedded vision systems have become an integral part of many modern technologies, especially in advanced
                                        mobile robotics applications (e.g. autonomous vehicles) [1]. Vision sensors facilitate object detection and localisation,
                                        which are crucial for navigation, obstacle avoidance, path planning, and performing specific tasks like manipulating
                                        objects or interacting with the environment [2, 3].
                                             Typical frame-based cameras capture video sequences in greyscale or colour with specific spatial (e.g. 1280 × 720
                                        pixels) and temporal (e.g. 60 frames per second) resolution. However, they can be challenging to apply in some
                                        circumstances because of issues such as motion blur during fast movements, high latency due to low frame rates, and
                                        difficulties in operating in uneven lighting conditions. These issues could be partially addressed by existing high-
                                        speed cameras, but these sensors are expensive and typically require good lighting conditions. Moreover, frame-based
                                        cameras generate large amounts of redundant data, which can be inefficient to process in real-time embedded systems.
                                             In contrast, neuromorphic sensors, also known as event cameras or dynamic vision sensors (DVS), offer several
                                        advantages that address these limitations [4]. In a DVS, each pixel operates independently and asynchronously1 ,
                                        detecting only changes in brightness rather than its absolute value and generating so-called events. Each event encodes
                                        the location (pixel coordinates), the timestamp (with microsecond precision), and the polarity (indicating increase or
                                        decrease in intensity). This approach results in lower average power consumption, high temporal resolution, and


                                           1 In the context of DVS, asynchronicity is defined as the ability to generate or process events directly at the moment of an intensity change

                                        registered by a given pixel, without maintaining fixed time intervals.
reduced data redundancy, as the changes are only captured in place and time of their occurrence. Furthermore, since
event generation is based on the logarithm of the brightness change, DVS has a high dynamic range which enables
reliable operation in environments with uneven illumination.
    As highlighted above, event cameras have many advantages, especially for applications in dynamic environments
for mobile robotics. However, efficient processing of the resulting asynchronous event stream remains challenging.
Computer vision methods developed over the last 70 years for frame cameras are not suitable for sparse spatio-
temporal point clouds. Therefore, several approaches to this problem have been proposed. The simplest method
is to project the event data onto a two-dimensional plane in order to create a pseudo-frame (often called an event-
frame), similar to the one obtained from a traditional camera [5]. This allows the almost direct application of classical
methods and convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [6, 7]. However, this approach requires the aggregation of events
over a fixed time window, which introduces information loss (especially high temporal resolution), generation of
redundant pixels, and higher latency. Therefore, recent research has focused on processing events in their original
sparse form.
    One recent approach is to use graph neural networks (GNNs) through a generation of a graph representation. In
such a structure, individual events are represented as vertices, while the edges connecting these vertices correspond to
their local relationships. As a consequence, the data represented as a sparse cloud of vertices in spatio-temporal space
can be processed efficiently with a graph neural network. In addition, recent research [8, 9, 10] indicates that such
graphs can be generated and updated asynchronously, thus not only reducing the number of operations for a single
event, but also limiting the latency of data processing.
    However, a key challenge remains the efficient processing of event data in a way that enables real-time2 realisation
of computer vision tasks with low latency, low power consumption, and high throughput. It is important to emphasise
that meeting these requirements is crucial for applications in mobile robotics, especially in case of e.g. autonomous
drone racing. In this field the manoeuvres during the flight have to be performed as fast as possible, which requires
extremely low latency thanks to the algorithm and the computing platform.
    The literature includes research on hardware implementations of event-based vision algorithms, most commonly
for embedded GPU platforms [9, 10]. Recently, Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) platforms, including system-
on-chip (SoC) FPGA devices, have also gained increasing attention [11, 12], due to their low power consumption,
high parallel processing capabilities, and flexibility enabled by hardware description languages. There is a growing
collaboration between FPGA manufacturers and the DVS industry, driving advancements in event-based vision3 .
    Therefore, in this work we propose an Event-based FPGA-accelerated Graph Convolutional Network – our strat-
egy for efficient event data processing aimed at real-time and low-power mobile robotics applications. In contrast to
prior FPGA GCN accelerators that assume a fixed graph structure [13, 14, 15], EFGCN operates on a graph that is
generated and updated asynchronously from the incoming event stream. We can summarise our main contribution as
follows:

    • We introduce a set of hardware-aware optimisations for graph convolutional networks processing event data.
      These optimisations are guided by FPGA resource constraints and informed by extensive ablation studies on
      multiple event-based classification datasets.
    • We present the first hardware implementation of a 3D MaxPool layer designed for event-data processing, which,
      by leveraging the temporal sparsity of event-based data, enables the deployment of larger network architectures
      and facilitates higher classification accuracy.
    • We present a custom hardware implementation of PointNetConv layers that exploits deterministic latency and
      throughput, achieved by using only constant-latency components without utilisation of any off-chip external
      memory. This design effectively leverages the temporal sparsity of event data for efficient and scalable event-
      driven processing.


    2 The precise definition of ’real-time’ depends heavily on the application and sensor used. In ’traditional’ computer vision this usually means at

least 20-25 frames per second (40-50 ms). In this work, our aim is to process the event stream generated by the sensor without any major delays,
i.e. in the order of single microseconds.
    3 https://www.prophesee.ai/event-based-metavision-amd-kria-starter-kit/




                                                                          2
                0.96
                                                                                                  EV-VGCNN

                                                        AEGNN                                                   AsyNet
                0.94

                                                                                     EvS-S
                                                                                                         YOLE
 Accuracy [%]




                                                   EFGCN-L
                0.92
                                              EFGCN-B
                                                                                     NvS-S                         RG-CNNs
                                     EFGCN-S

                 0.9                                                                                              G-CNNs



                                                                                                                               Software models
                0.88                EvGNN                                                                                      Hardware models

                   103                  104                     105                              106                     107                     108
                                                                      Number of parameters [#]


Figure 1: Classification accuracy versus number of parameters for the proposed EFGCN variants (red) on the N-Cars dataset, compared with prior
event-based models implemented in software (blue circles) and in hardware (blue filled markers). The x-axis is logarithmic.



                • Using these methods, we present one of the first end-to-end hardware implementations of a GCN for real-time,
                  continuous, sparse, and asynchronous event data processing. The design is evaluated on a SoC FPGA through
                  both simulation and hardware testing. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first implementation that supports
                  all characteristic GCN layers, including pooling layers.
                • Among hardware-implemented methods considered in this work, EFGCN provides the most memory-efficient
                  FPGA approach, requiring up to 70% less on-chip memory than the closest graph-based hardware baseline
                  while achieving higher accuracy on the N-Cars dataset, demonstrating a competitive design for mobile robotics
                  applications.

    Our approach allowed us to significantly reduce the size of the model by up to 100 times, while limiting the
accuracy loss to 2.2% and 2.9% for the N-Cars and N-Caltech101 datasets, compared to non-hardware state-of-the-
art GCN methods. The proposed custom EFGCN hardware module implemented for heterogenous ZCU104 SoC
FPGA board achieves a processing throughput of up to 13.3 million events per second with a low latency of 4.39-9.31
ms. The prepared solution supports multiple configurations (cf. Figure 1). Our approach offers strong scalability
across various model sizes, input resolutions, and scene dynamics by leveraging highly parameterisable hardware
modules. This design enables flexible adaptation of the system architecture to meet the specific requirements of
a given application. These results present the potential of our approach for efficient real-time processing of DVS data
in embedded systems. Both the software model and the hardware modules have been published as an open source
repository (https://github.com/vision-agh/gcnn-dvs-fpga).
    The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. In Section 2 we present existing work on event data processing
with an emphasis on FPGA-implemented approaches. Section 3 details our proposed method for hardware-aware
design of graph convolutional network architectures for event data processing. A comprehensive description of the

                                                                             3
  Table 1: Comparison of graph network/convolution types and hardware platforms used for event data processing by graph neural networks.


     Work                Year     Network/Convolution type         Task                                            Platform
     Sekikawa [16]       2019     PointNet                         Semantic segmentation and ego-motion            CPU/GPU
     Wang [17]           2019     PointNet/PointNet++              Gesture recognition                             GPU
     Bi [18]             2019     SplineConv                       Classification                                  Not mentioned
     Mitrokhin [19]      2020     GraphConv                        3D classification                               GPU
     Li [8]              2021     GraphConv                        Classification                                  CPU
     Schaefer [9]        2022     SplineConv                       Classification and detection                    GPU
     Gehrig [10]         2022     SplineConv                       Detection                                       GPU
     Jeziorek [20]       2023     PointNetConv                     Classification and detection                    GPU
     Jeziorek [21]       2024     PointNetConv                     Graph generation and detection                  GPU/FPGA
     Yang [22]           2024     PointNetConv                     Classification                                  GPU/FPGA
     This work           2025     PointNetConv                     Classification                                  GPU/FPGA


SoC FPGA implementation is provided in Section 4. In Section 5 we present the experiments conducted and ablation
studies. The paper concludes with Sections 6 and 7, where we present limitations, summarise our results and outline
further work.


2. Related work

   Computer vision methods for traditional frame-based cameras are being developed for over 70 years. However,
with new vision sensors emerging, such as event cameras, these methods need to be altered to new types of data or
completely new methods of data processing need to be established. In this Section we focus on two different aspects:
possible ways of processing data from an event camera and existing FPGA-based implementations.

2.1. Event data processing
    Currently, three main approaches are employed for event data processing. The first and most widely used approach
involves dense neural networks, including convolutional neural networks [6, 23, 7, 24, 25, 26] and vision transform-
ers (ViTs) [27, 28, 29]. These methods deliver high accuracy results and benefit from well-established techniques used
for conventional image processing. However, they are not inherently designed for sparse and asynchronous events.
To handle event data, these models first create dense representations like event-frames or time-surfaces [5], which
introduces additional latency. In this approach ‘empty’ pixels are also processed, i.e. pixels without any events, which
is inefficient in the case of sparse data. A compromise is achieved through asynchronous methods [25, 26], which
update only local pixels, where events occur. Nevertheless, these models tend to have large memory footprints and
high computational complexity, while dense representations sacrifice high temporal resolution present in events.
    The second approach utilises spiking neural networks (SNNs). They mimic the operation of brain neurons
by accumulating membrane potential at each neuron and generating a spike once a certain threshold is exceeded.
Since they are aligned with the event-based paradigm, SNNs can be directly applied to event cameras. However, the
spiking mechanism inherent in SNNs is non-differentiable, making it difficult to apply the backpropagation approach
for training [30]. Additionally, the results often fall short in accuracy, and the learning mechanisms require further
research to enhance their performance [31, 32, 33, 34, 35].
    The third and currently popular approach is to employ graph convolutional networks for the processing of event
data. In this method, the data is represented as a spatio-temporal graph, with each event corresponding to a vertex
connected to neighbouring vertices by edges. Table 1 compares various models and applications of GCNs for event
data processing. Early work in this area demonstrated that GCNs significantly reduce the number of floating-point
operations per event, due to their ability to maintain sparse data structures [18, 19, 36]. Moreover, later research
demonstrated that they can be dynamically expanded by adding new events to the existing structure, with only local
vertices requiring an update [8, 9, 10, 37].
    A notable contribution within this domain is the AEGNN framework [9], which introduced the concept of k-hop
graph updates, achieving high accuracy results with significantly reduced computational overhead compared to dense

                                                                    4
models. This approach has inspired further research [20, 21, 12], including our work. Moreover, since GCNs leverage
standard backpropagation, this enables the training of larger models for tasks such as object detection [9, 10, 37].
Recent work [37] presents a hybrid system that integrates graph neural networks for event data with CNNs for frame
data, highlighting the potential of GCNs for various computer vision applications. Overall, GCNs offer a balanced
solution, combining high accuracy output of dense models with the efficiency of SNNs.
    However, AEGNN’s reliance on SplineConv (with learnable B-spline basis functions over continuous edge at-
tributes) and k-hop bidirectional graph updates introduces high per-edge complexity, irregular memory access patterns,
and unpredictable latency – all challenging for an on-chip FPGA deployment. This motivated our use of PointNet-
Conv with directed graphs, which avoids edge attributes and limits updates to the incoming vertex only (Sections 3.1
and 3.2).

2.2. FPGA implementations
    To fully exploit the advantages of event cameras, a suitable computing hardware must be used. FPGA platforms
proved to be very efficient in traditional frame-based data processing with low latency [38]. Therefore, there has been
a growing interest in combining event-based data processing with FPGAs to develop energy-efficient vision systems.
The most comprehensive review in this area was conducted in 2024 [11], which surveyed various event-based FPGA
solutions.
    Classical approaches of event-based data processing on FPGA platform include HOTS [39] and PCA-RECT [40]
algorithms, which employ machine learning techniques like support vector machines (SVMs) combined with prin-
cipal component analysis (PCA) for feature extraction. These methods require relatively small amount of hardware
resources, but their application to complex computer vision tasks or larger datasets is limited.
    In case of AI-based methods, FPGA-based event processing can be divided into two subcategories: SNNs and
CNNs. SNN-based solutions are characterised by their low latency [41, 42], but the main drawback lies in the model
sizes, as most SNN implementations use small input resolutions, typically around 32×32 or 64×64 pixels. As a result,
their quality rarely approaches state-of-the-art performance. On the other hand, CNN-based solutions [43, 44] can
achieve high accuracy but require significant amount of hardware resources, exceeding the capacity of medium-sized
FPGAs. This limits their applicability for edge devices and mobile robotics applications.
    Besides the methods described, hardware implementations of GCN-based solutions have recently appeared. Our
previous work [20] emphasised the limitations of existing graph convolution methods. This study revealed that most
graph convolution layers require a large number of parameters and often depend on edge attributes, which increase
the graph’s size. The most promising layer was found to be PointNetConv, which significantly reduces the number of
parameters. It does not require edge attributes and improves the quality of the results.
    Another limiting factor, which was not analysed in several GCN-based solutions, was graph generation procedure.
An example is the work [14], in which the authors focused on accelerating a GCN network in hardware, using graph
data generated earlier. Therefore, they did not face the challenges of handling raw input data in real time, which is
usually crucial in practical situations.
    In the study [21] we explored the hardware implementation of an efficient graph generation method for event
data on the ZCU104 FPGA platform. This work introduced a matrix-based approach for neighbour searches and
demonstrated the advantages of using directed graphs, allowing asynchronous graph generation without the necessity
of updating older vertices.
    Recent paper [12] presents a complete system for event-based graph processing on an FPGA. The authors adopted
the same graph convolution method as in [20] and utilised directed graphs, similar to the approach in [21, 45]. They
also evaluated different neighbourhood search patterns. However, this solution differs from EFGCN in several
important aspects. Without pooling, the graph size and edge count remain constant throughout the network, causing
a 50× increase in FLOPs in deeper layers (Section 5.2.1) and capping feature dimensionality at 32 elements per vertex.
Moreover, the design relies on an off-chip DDR memory, introducing non-deterministic latency and higher energy cost
(see Section 5.4.4). In contrast, EFGCN introduces hardware 3D MaxPool layers that progressively reduce the graph
between convolutions, enabling deeper architectures with up to 128-element feature maps, while operating entirely
on-chip with deterministic latency.
    More broadly, existing FPGA-based GCN solutions either omit pooling layers entirely [12], rely on fixed pre-
generated non-event graphs [13, 14, 15], or depend on an external off-chip memory [12]. To the best of our knowledge,

                                                          5
no prior hardware implementation supports all characteristic GCN layers – including pooling – within a single on-chip
pipeline, nor has 3D MaxPool for event data been previously realised in hardware. EFGCN directly addresses both
gaps.

3. The proposed method

    Our research was motivated by the need to bridge the gap between the hardware implementation of GCNs and
their application in event data processing. For this purpose, we emphasise the sparse nature of the input data, par-
ticularly its temporal aspect, and incorporate it directly into the network design. The goal was to develop a solution
that maximises the use of information captured by event cameras, enabling accurate and instant event-by-event data
processing (as soon as the data is registered by a neuromorphic sensor) with minimal latency, low computational load
and low resource utilisation. In this way, we aim to design a system suitable for real-time mobile robotics applications
operating in highly dynamic environments. In this Section, we outline the solutions and necessary modifications used
for implementing a GCN on a SoC FPGA.

3.1. Event-graph construction
    Event cameras are characterised by the ability to capture changes in brightness at the individual pixel level,
which distinguishes them from traditional frame-based cameras. The operation of an event generation is governed
by a threshold mechanism, which determines whether the change in light intensity for a specific pixel exceeds
a predefined value. The outcome of this process is an event stream that can be described as a sequence of tuples
evi = (ui , ti , pi ), where ui = (xi , yi ) indicates the pixel location at which the event was generated, ti is the timestamp,
and pi ∈ {−1, 1} denotes whether the change was negative or positive, respectively.
    In the literature [18, 9], a standard method for generating a graph from events is to construct a spatio-temporal
graph G = (V, E), where each event evi is represented as a vertex vi ∈ V with a position Pi = (ui , ti ) and attribute
Xi = (pi ). Subsequently, for each pair of vertices i and j, an edge ei j ∈ E is generated, if their Euclidean distance di j
represented as:
                                                       q
                                                di, j = (xi − x j )2 + (yi − y j )2 + (ti − t j )2                           (1)
is smaller than a predefined parameter R. To normalise the time dimension for better comparability with spatial
coordinates, the timestamps ti are scaled by a factor α, usually equal to the time window, resulting in ti∗ = ti · α.
Additionally, the number of edges is limited to Dmax per vertex to avoid excessive edge generation. In practice,
Dmax defines a trade-off between capturing more complete local spatio-temporal relations and maintaining bounded
memory usage and computational cost, which is particularly important for efficient hardware implementation.
    However, directly searching for neighbouring vertices across the entire graph presents computational and mem-
ory challenges, especially in the context of hardware implementations, which would require using external memory,
resulting in increased latency and power consumption. Traversing all vertices in a graph of millions of events results
in O(n) complexity. Our objective is to minimise the number of searches per event to maintain real-time performance.
Moreover, generating directed edges that support the continuous addition of new events without requiring updates to
the existing graph is crucial for efficient hardware processing, as discussed further in Subsection 3.2.
    To address these challenges, we adopt the method proposed in [21], which optimises graph generation for hard-
ware. For a comprehensive explanation of the method, refer to the original work. Below, we summarise the key steps
of the approach.
    Building on prior works [8, 9] and classical CNN-based models, the method begins by normalising both the
spatial ui = (xi , yi ) and temporal ti coordinates to a common range β. The normalised coordinates are then discretised
to integer values:                             x            y            t 
                                                    i              i              i
                                         xi∗ = β ·    , y∗i = β ·    , ti∗ = β ·    .                                (2)
                                                   X              Y              T
 Here, X and Y denote the sensor’s spatial resolution (width and height) and T is the time window. This process maps
the vertices into the set V ⊂ N3 , where each component ranges from 0 to β.
    Neighbour searches are performed using a neighbourhood matrix (shortly N M), a two-dimensional matrix that
corresponds to the normalised spatial resolution of the events. Each cell in the N M stores the timestamp and the
                                                               6
polarity of the most recent event at given spatial coordinates. For each new event evi , potential neighbours are searched
among the pixels within a radius R of its position u∗i . If the timestamp t∗j of a neighbouring pixel u∗j satisfies Eq. (1),
a direct edge ei j ∈ E is created and the timestamp in the matrix is consequently updated to t∗j .
    This approach allows for the initialisation of a fixed-size data structure (β × β), that stores information about
previous events, limits the number of neighbour searches based on the parameter R, and enables the continuous
processing of events while maintaining directed edges. In our implementation, Dmax is not defined as a separate
hyperparameter; instead, it is implicitly bounded by the neighbourhood search radius R (set to 3 in our experiments)
and the spatial discretisation, which together limit the maximum number of edges per vertex to 29. The applied
β parameter with spatial resolution (X, Y) and time window T for different datasets used for the evaluation of our
method are shown in Section 5.

3.2. Graph convolution
     The core operation in graph convolutional networks is a convolution, which facilitates the efficient propaga-
tion of information between locally connected vertices. This enables updating vertex representations and extracting
relevant features. Graph convolution generally involves three stages:
     1. Message Function (ϕ): in the first stage, the message function ϕ operates on a vertex vi and its neighbours
v j ∈ N(i), determining the information exchange between these vertices. The message function can utilise the vertex
attributes Xi , X j , their positionsL
                                     Pi , P j , and edges E.                        L
     2. Aggregation Function ( ): next, the aggregation function                          combines the message values collected from
all neighbouring vertices, producing a representative value that includes the information from the local neighbourhood
of vertex vi .
     3. Update Function (γ): finally, the update function γ adjusts the vertex attribute Xi using the aggregated infor-
mation.
     The overall message passing process can be mathematically represented as Eq. (3).
                                                                                              
                                                             M                              
                                                  X̂i = γ     ϕ(Xi , X j , Pi , P j , E)                                  (3)
                                                             j∈N(i)

Here, both ϕ andL  γ are differentiable functions, typically implemented as multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs). The aggre-
gation function      can be a simple operator like sum or maximum.
    As shown in Table 1, several different convolutional layers are available and widely used, such as SplineConv
[9, 10, 18], GraphConv [19, 8], or network architectures like PointNet and PointNet++ [16, 17]. However, these
solutions often have high memory demands [20], which is not a major issue when using GPUs, but becomes critical in
embedded implementations. The extensive memory utilisation by the convolutions has a potential to adversely impact
the reduction in dimensionality or depth of the network, which leads to a loss in quality. Therefore, in our work, we
focused on using the PointNetConv4 layer.
    This choice was guided by the results of our prior research [20], where we achieved a major reduction in model
size and its inherent suitability for a point cloud data. The PointNetConv layer is designed to efficiently process vertex
features in 3D point clouds, implementing the transformation defined by Eq. (4):
                                                                              !
                                                X̂i = γ max ϕ(X j , P j − Pi ) ,                                       (4)
                                                               j∈N(i)

where ϕ is a function that processes the neighbour vertex attribute X j with the relative spatial coordinate P j − Pi , and
the max operator selects a representative attribute based on information received from the neighbours N(i). In our
implementation, the message function ϕ is a simple linear transformation, mapping input features from dimension
in + 3 to out, where the additional +3 accounts for the spatio-temporal dimensions of the events. To minimise
complexity, we omit the update function γ, and in order to apply the BatchNorm merging [48], we used normalisation
after ϕ function.


   4 The implementation of the PointNetConv layer presented here is based on its implementation in the PyTorch Geometric library [46], which is

based on the work [47].

                                                                        7
    The selection of PointNetConv as the convolution method for the hardware-implemented system was therefore
motivated by its limited computational complexity, wherein the features of vertices connected by an edge are combined
using a simple max() function. The efficiency of PointNetConv enables a reduction in model size, which in turn
decreases the demand for internal FPGA memory, which is highly constrained and energy-intensive resource. We
investigated the effect of the convolution used on the model size and the results in Section 5.2.2.

Edge directionality
    In the case of graphs that are bidirectional or directed against time, each new event added to the graph can be
connected to the neighbourhood N(i) of an existing vertex. This necessitates recalculating not only the attribute of
the new event, but also the attributes of all vertices it is connected to. Such an update propagates further into the
graph since each subsequent layer utilises information from more distant neighbours. This process, described in
detail in [9] as a k-hop neighbourhood, presents challenges for hardware implementations. Specifically, it requires
storing information about previous vertices for each convolution and updating them continuously. In contrast, for
graphs directed with time new events are connected only to the nearest vertices, and only the new vertex needs an
update. This significantly reduces the number of operations per event while enabling asynchronous graph updates.
This mechanism is crucial for efficient hardware implementation, as it can exploit the spatio-temporal sparsity of
event-based data.

3.3. Graph MaxPool
    Graph MaxPool is a technique used to reduce the number of vertices in a graph. It is particularly useful in deeper
layers of neural networks, where the size of attributes can increase significantly. The technique involves partitioning
the data space into uniform Ck clusters of size g x × gy × gt . For each of these non-empty clusters, a new vertex
is selected whose attribute value corresponds to the maximum attribute value among all vertices in the cluster, as
represented by Eq. (5).

                                                      Xk = max Xi                                                      (5)
                                                             i∈Ck

    Meanwhile, the position of the new vertex is determined as the average of the positions of all vertices in the cluster,
as in Eq. (6).
                                                          1 X
                                                   Pk =            Pi                                                  (6)
                                                         |Ck | i∈C
                                                                    k

    In this process, connections that link vertices from different clusters are merged into a single edge between new
points, eliminating redundant connections and those internal to the groupings.
    In the works [9, 10], the MaxPool operation is performed two-dimensionally with respect to space, meaning each
cluster has a gt parameter set to the maximum value. As a result, for a given spatial range g x ×gy , there can be only one
output vertex. This was motivated by computational reduction due to a significant decrease in the number of vertices.
However, there are two key issues with this approach. The first is the continuous change in the spatial structure of the
graph after pooling, as with each new event evi , the position Pk is modified according to Eq. (6). The second issue,
highlighted by the authors in [10], is that this operation can cause bidirectional edges between output nodes. Both
effects impact the continuous updating of the graph itself as well as the recalculation of vertex attributes, which in
case of an FPGA results in a constant need to read, recompute, and write data.
    To address this, we propose two modifications to this method to enable its hardware implementation. The first
modification is to apply 3D pooling, where the cluster size is set to the same value for each dimension, so g x = gy =
gt = g. The result is a larger number of vertices compared to the 2D method, but the pooling operation is divided
into time intervals, which negates the need to update vertices in the temporally older parts of the graph. The second
modification is to scale down the vertex positions according to the cluster size, so that each position value Pk is divided
by the parameter g. This ensures that the edges in the output graph remain directed with time and reduces resource
consumption on an FPGA.
    Our analysis in Section 5.2.1 shows that using 3D pooling positively affects the qualitative performance. Also,
scaling the graph down causes a significant reduction in both memory and logic resources (see Sections 4.3 and 4.4).


                                                            8
4. Hardware implementation

    After extensive ablation studies in software (Section 5.2), we developed a set of hardware modules for processing
an event stream using graph convolutional neural networks. Our custom architecture implemented in SystemVerilog
was simulated for consistency with the software model and evaluated across multiple configurations on the Zynq
UltraScale+ MPSoC ZCU104 Evaluation Kit (featuring the XCZU7EV-2FFVC1156 chip).
    The hardware architecture was designed as a pipeline of modules implementing successive layers of a graph
convolutional network that process data in a completely parallel manner – each layer can process data simultaneously,
as long as its input data is available (Fig. 2). The hardware-aware optimizations proposed in Section 3 were aimed,
among other objectives, at reducing memory requirements, thereby enabling the exclusive use of internal memory
resources during inference (no off-chip memory). Satisfying this constraint not only reduces energy consumption
(as the use of BRAM/URAM is more energy-efficient), but also ensures constant and deterministic memory access
latencies. Consequently, the computational architecture could be designed to fully exploit the spatio-temporal sparsity
of event-based data by appropriately tailoring the degree of computational parallelism. The system consists of two
parts – asynchronous (operating in an event-by-event manner) and synchronous, where operations are performed on
sub-graphs. The toolchain can process sequence of events of any length continuously, generating a prediction at the
output for data recorded during the last TIME_WINDOW (duration of a single sample of event data sufficient to perform
the classification – in described configurations we support windows of 50 and 100 ms), but 4 times as often (features
available at system’s output every TIME_WINDOW/4).
    The system assumes the use of a heterogenous SoC FPGA platform, where feature extraction is implemented in the
programmable logic (PL) and the network head is performed in the processing system (PS). The operating frequency
of 200 MHz was selected based on experimental evaluation to balance latency and timing requirements. Lower clock
frequencies could be used to reduce power consumption at the cost of increased latency. In the following sections, we
present the functional description of each hardware module, preserving their order in the system pipeline.

4.1. Graph generation (u_generate_graph)
    For testing purposes, in the designed system consecutive events are read by the processor from an SD card and then
transmitted to the programmable logic in such a way as to maintain the intervals between the events, corresponding
to their timestamps (emulating the actual output of a DVS). We also successfully evaluated the continuous processing
of data read directly from a DVS integrated with the PL [49].
    The events are then normalised in the FPGA (Eq. (2)) – the coordinate values x, y and the timestamp t are scaled
to 0-β (graph size) range. Currently, we support graphs sizes of 128 × 128 × 128 and 256 × 256 × 256. The polarisation
value is encoded as a single bit. The normalised events are written into a FIFO queue implemented with BlockRAM
to be then read by the following modules. This buffering mechanism ensures correct processing when the dynamics
of the observed scene exceed the system’s bandwidth (13.3 million events per second that can be processed by our
architecture).
    The subsequent events read from the FIFO are used to update the graph representation. For this purpose, it is
necessary to determine the list of neighbours for the currently processed vertex.
    The hardware-aware optimisation techniques described in Section 3.1 enable the implementation of a graph gen-
erator with reduced memory resource utilisation. The use of a directed graph allows candidate edge connections to be
searched exclusively among previously processed vertices. Furthermore, limiting the maximum number of connected
vertices sharing the same x and y coordinates ensures that edge construction requires storing only information related
to the most recent events within each memory cell. The neighbourhood matrix (Section 3.1) is implemented as
a two-port BlockRAM memory of β × β depth and width of β+2 (storing the timestamp of the last recorded event
for a particular pixel, its polarity and is_empty flag). For each event read from the FIFO, the edge candidates are
read from the N M – 29 surrounding values (for R = 3). For each read, the semi-sphere condition is checked (Eq.
(1)). Next, the currently processed event is written to the N M. This operation, due to the use of dual-port memories,
requires 15 READ operations on one of the ports, and 14 READ operations and one WRITE operation on the other.
    The latency of 15 clock cycles for a single event is a computational bottleneck of the proposed system. It can
be determined that, with a 200 MHz clock, the throughput of the proposed system is 13.3 MEPS, which exceeds
the values observed for real event stream data in the utilised datasets (1.35 MEPS for N-Caltech101, 0.59 MEPS for
N-Cars, 0.34 MEPS for CIFAR10-DVS, and 0.063 MEPS for MNIST-DVS).
                                                          9
Figure 2: Schematic of the EFGCN network hardware modules with the asynchronous part marked in blue and the synchronous in green. The
orange modules represent integrated memory, while the characteristics of data transferred between the selected modules are highlighted in yellow
blocks. The number of features for a particular graph convolution layer dim1 -dim5 depends on the model (Small, Base or Large). We support
configurations with normalisation size β = 128 and β = 256.



    Once the N M analysis is complete, the module outputs pairs of events (x, y, t, and polarity), and a vector describing
their edges (including polarity of connected events).

4.2. Asynchronous convolution (u_async_conv)
    Successive pairs of events and their edges appear at the first convolution module’s (Section 3.2) input asyn-
chronously with preserved order – no more frequently than once every 15 clock cycles, but with an unknown time
span (depending on the dynamics of the observed scene).


                                                                      10
        Figure 3: Operation of the 3D MaxPool layer. The green area refers to the pooling region before and after the max operation.



     For each processed vertex, the graph convolution (implementation of Eq. (4)) requires performing maximum of
30 multiplications – one for its own feature map (self-loop) and one for the feature map of each neighbouring vertex
connected by an edge (a maximum of 29). The input feature map consists of four components: polarisation and the
positional difference between connected vertices (for the self-loop, this is (0, 0, 0)). No extra memory is required,
since the described initial convolution process only the values that are already present at the module’s input.
     The implementation of the linear function ϕ (Eq. (4)) utilises two parallel modules for matrix multiplication,
which are realised in LUT logic resources. For the first convolutional layer, all elements of the output vector are
computed in parallel – therefore, the processing time for a vertex-edge pair equals 15 clock cycles. For each resulting
value (after adding the bias), a requantisation process is required. It consists of scaling (using DSP and bit-shifting)
followed by the addition of a constant ZERO_POINT. The resulting vectors for each edge (and self-loop) are compared
with an element-wise maximum operation (taking into account layer-specific minimum values – ReLU activation).
This generates the final feature map vector, which is propagated to subsequent model layers. The output of the module
is the currently processed event, a list of its edges and a vector of its features.
     It should be noted that for this convolution (unlike the subsequent ones, see Section 4.4), the entire matrix-vector
multiplication is performed in parallel in order to avoid introducing an additional bottleneck – the module must provide
throughput not lower than that of the graph generation module. Consequently, the number of output features of the
first convolution in each of the evaluated models (see Section 5.1.2) is limited – increasing it would result in higher
utilisation of both DSP and logic resources.

4.3. 3D MaxPool (u_maxpool)
    Immediately following the first convolution, a 3D MaxPool operation (Section 3.3) with a 4 × 4 × 4 kernel is
applied. Its purpose is to scale the graph in each of the three dimensions – x, y, and time – by replacing the input
events within 4 × 4 × 4 regions with a single output vertex. Consequently, the graph of SIZE (for the input graph
SIZE = β) is replaced for subsequent layers with a graph of SIZE/4. The output feature vectors are the results of
an element-wise maximum operation (Eq. (5); visualised on Fig. 3) applied to all inputs within a given region. This
operation leads to the following:
   • The number of processed vertices for subsequent layers in the network model is reduced 16 times, leading to
     a significant decrease in the required memory resources.
   • The number of edges is also reduced. After 4 × 4 clustering, the maximum positional difference between
     connected vertices is reduced to R = 1, and their number is reduced to 17. As a consequence, the maximum
     number of matrix-vector multiplications required for graph convolution in subsequent layers is reduced as well
     (from 30 to 18). As multiplication accounts for a significant portion of the utilised logic resources, this effect
     is crucial for the scalability of the hardware architecture.

                                                                    11
Figure 4: The graph convolution module in the synchronous part of the system. The input vector, composed of features retrieved from memory
(green) and position differences (blue), is processed by the multiplier matrix (yellow). The resulting vector (red) is generated through an append
operation in k steps, with m elements each.



    • The processing order of events is disrupted. Scaling the graph not only among the x and y coordinates, but also
      in the time plane, forces data accumulation within specific intervals. Subsequent layers can only process data
      once the accumulation is complete.
   The hardware module of a 3D MaxPool operates on the BlockRAM feature memory with a depth of (SIZE/4)2 ,
which is addressed using x and y coordinates. Subsequent events are assigned to one of its cells, where the feature
map is stored along with an updated list of its edges. A single read and write operation of a given cell allows the
execution of the element-wise max(), when more than one event is assigned to it. Event accumulation is performed
within a time unit:
                                                   T I ME_WINDOW
                                            ∆T =                      .                                         (7)
                                                        (S IZE/4)
    As a result, the feature memory contains the complete feature map after a ∆T period defined by Eq. (7), and only
then can it be processed by subsequent layers. The disruption of event order forces a change in the data processing
method in the next part of the model (referred to as ‘synchronous’) – instead of event-by-event processing, two-
dimensional feature maps called temporal channels are processed, representing all events that occurred within a given
∆T .
    An advantage of using the 3D MaxPool module (along with constant-latency memory resources) is the ability to
precisely determine the required throughput for each subsequent layer in the synchronous part of the system. Based
on this value, an appropriate computation strategy is chosen to ensure that as many operations as possible can be
executed sequentially.

4.4. Synchronous graph convolution (u_sync_conv)
    To process the entire temporal channel, it is necessary to compute the output of the linear function ϕ (Eq. (4)).
For each element, the system must read the feature maps of the currently processed vertex as well as all vertices
connected to it by an edge, resulting in a maximum of 18 memory accesses. Notably, eight of these potential edges
connect vertices within the same ∆T , while the remaining nine connect to neighbouring vertices from the previous ∆T
(R = 1 along the temporal axis as well). Executing this convolution requires access to the last two temporal channels,
a constraint that was taken into account when designing the ‘feature memory’ mechanism (Fig. 5).
                                                                       12
   The computation of the linear function ϕ for a single vector xi consists of the following (Fig. 4):

   • The vector xi is constructed by aggregating an n-element feature vector (retrieved from ‘feature memory’) and
     three position difference values (Eq. (4) – P). The position differences are obtained from a look-up table (LUT)
     based on the coordinate differences between vertices connected by an edge.
   • Each element of the output vector ϕ(xi ) is computed by multiplying xi by a weight vector. Depending on the
     required module throughput (determined by ∆T ), the number of parallel vector multipliers (m) can be adjusted.
     The more multipliers are used, the higher the resource consumption. Therefore, the smallest possible value of
     m to ensure that the required throughput is maintained without exceeding resource constraints is selected.
   • For each iteration (i.e. in each clock cycle), m elements of the output feature vector are determined. This process
     is repeated k times for a single input vector to obtain the ϕ(xi ) of dimensions dim = m × k.

    With the required access to two preceding temporal channels, which are stored in independent ‘feature memory’
units, the system processes two vectors simultaneously by default. The convolution result for a given vertex is de-
termined as the outcome of the bitwise max operation applied to all ϕ(xi ) vectors. The number of clock cycles (CC)
required for this computation can be expressed as:
                                                                  dim
                                                 CCvertex = 9 ×       ,                                             (8)
                                                                   m
where dim represents the size of the output feature map, and m denotes the number of parallel multipliers used. In
summary, the processing of an entire temporal channel takes:

                                           CCt = CCvertex × S IZE × S IZE                                           (9)

where S IZE represents the current size of the processed graph, which decreases after each successive MaxPool.
   The strategy for reducing LUT resource utilisation involves selecting the maximum number of parallel multipliers
m so that ∆T cc (in clock cycles) satisfies Eq. (10).
                                                        dim
                                          ∆T cc ≥ 9 ×       × S IZE × S IZE                                        (10)
                                                         m
   In the synchronous part of the system, each graph convolutional layer can employ a different multiplication strat-
egy (for decreasing S IZE with each MaxPool).

4.5. Memory management
    For GCN inference, it is necessary to store intermediate feature maps (in the synchronous part) as well as weights.
In the proposed hardware module, only internal memory resources that offer constant and limited latency (BlockRAM
and UltraRAM) are utilised – access to any off-chip memory is not required. To minimise memory resource usage,
a memory-sharing mechanism has been implemented between successive layers (Fig. 5).
    Each module implementing the feature memory consists of three independent memory blocks (implemented with
BlockRAM or UltraRAM, depending on the feature vector size). While the preceding layer (e.g. MaxPool) writes
data to one of these memory blocks generating a temporal channel for ∆T n , the other two (storing data for ∆T n−1
and ∆T n−2 , respectively) are used by the next layer. Once convolution processing for an entire temporal channel is
completed, the oldest memory block (corresponding to ∆T n−2 ) is reset. An appropriate multiplication strategy ensures
that the graph convolutional layer completes processing before the next temporal channel is ready. At that point,
memory switching occurs so that new data is stored in the recently cleared memory block.
    Weight matrices are stored in distributed RAM for the first (asynchronous) convolutional layer due to the re-
quirement of a simultaneous access and the relatively small size. In the synchronous part of the network, the weight
matrices are stored in BlockRAM. However, the memory utilised for this purpose represents only a small portion of
the overall usage.


                                                           13
Figure 5: The memory switching method – memory blocks are represented as yellow squares, while arrows indicate memory writes and reads. The
red colour denotes memory reset.

Table 2: Details of statistics and parameters in the graph generation stage for the event datasets used, including N-Cars (N-C), N-Caltech101
(N-Cal), CIFAR10-DVS (C-DVS) and MNIST-DVS (M-DVS).


                         Datasets              N-C [50]        N-Cal [51]         C-DVS [52]          M-DVS [53]
                         Samples                24029             8246               10000                30000
                         Classes                  2                100                10                    10
                         Duration              100 ms            300 ms             1280 ms                2-3 s
                        Resolution            120 × 100         240 × 180          128 × 128            128 × 128
                    Normalisation β              128                256               128                  128
                     Time window                100 ms             50 ms             100 ms               100 ms


4.6. Hardware module’s output
    Regardless of the chosen configuration of the GCN architecture, the processed graph at the output of the reconfig-
urable part of the system (after the sequence of MaxPool layers and graph convolution) has a size of SIZE = 4.
    As a result, successive temporal channels are transmitted to the software part of the heterogeneous system every
TIME_WINDOW/4 ms.
    The final feature map is used as input to the linear layer implemented in the PS to determine the classification
results. We implemented the head of the network in the PS to increase the versatility of the proposed architecture –
the same hardware module for feature extraction can be used for different computer vision tasks (while it could be
implemented in reconfigurable logic, with relaxed throughput requirements, this is not necessary).
    The effective inference rate remains independent of the network architecture or event rates and depends ex-
clusively on the TIME_WINDOW: considering continuous event data processing, predictions can be generated every
TIME_WINDOW/4 ms, with each prediction taking into account the most recent TIME_WINDOW ms of data. The predic-
tion latency of the system is influenced by the chosen architecture (the number of features in each convolution layer
and the adopted parallel multiplication strategy); its evaluation is presented in Section 5.4.


5. Experiments

5.1. Setup
5.1.1. Datasets
    In our experiments, we focused on the object classification from events. We selected four commonly used datasets
including N-Cars [50], N-Caltech101 [51], CIFAR10-DVS [52], and MNIST-DVS [53]. The details about the dataset
statistics and the parameters used during graph generation are summarised in Table 2. For the N-Caltech101 dataset,
due to the larger resolution and dynamics, the normalisation parameter β is set to 256 and TIME_WINDOW to 50 ms.

                                                                    14
Table 3: The number of parallel vector multipliers m required to meet the throughput requirements for each model (with β = 256 and TIME_WINDOW
of 50 ms).


                                       Output dim                                        Parallel multipliers m
   Model              Conv2          Conv3 Conv4                     Conv5          Conv2 Conv3 Conv4 Conv5
EFGCN-S                  32              32             32             32               8               8               1              1
EFGCN-B                  32              32             64              64              8               8               2              2
EFGCN-L                  32              64             64             128              8              16               2              4

5.1.2. Model details
    For the software implementation of the models, the Torch framework [54] was used along with the PyTorch
Geometric library [46]. All experiments were performed on our three EFGCN models: Small, Base, and Large. Each
model consists of 5 convolutional layers and two MaxPool layers. A PoolOut layer was used at the end of each model,
which is a simple 2D MaxPool and a single MLP layer for classification. Layer dimensions and exact configuration
for all three variants are provided in the supplementary material.
    Each model was implemented on the heterogeneous ZCU104 platform in two configurations: β = 128 with
TIME_WINDOW = 100 ms and β = 256 with TIME_WINDOW = 50 ms.
    For a 200 MHz clock, each configuration meets the timing requirements. Simulation results confirmed the con-
sistency of the hardware module with the software model and the previously estimated throughput of 13.3 MEPS.
For the β = 128 configuration, computing all output feature map elements independently for each convolution (i.e.
with m = 1) satisfies the required throughput. However, for larger graphs and smaller time windows, parallelisation
of certain multiplications is necessary. The number of parallel vector multipliers required for each configuration is
presented in Table 3 (details are available in the supplementary material).

5.1.3. Training details
    In all experiments, the Adam optimiser [55] was used along with the ExponentialLR scheduler. Each model was
trained for 100 epochs, and for model quantisation the quantisation aware training (QAT) technique was applied for
additional 50 epochs. During training, we used data augmentation in the form of event flipping along the X-axis
(disabled for the MNIST-DVS dataset due to digit asymmetry) and spatial rotation of events in the (x, y) plane by
a uniformly sampled random angle around the event cloud centroid, with timestamps unchanged.

5.2. Ablation studies
    Our ablation studies focus on three key aspects of the design: (i) model size, measured as the number of parameters
(which directly affects on-chip memory usage), (ii) computational cost, measured in FLOPs (which is a proxy for re-
quired throughput, latency, and energy per inference), and (iii) task performance, measured as classification accuracy.
Unless stated otherwise, all ablations are performed on the Base model using the N-Cars dataset. For comparison,
we include two recent event-based GCN approaches: EvGNN [12], which provides a hardware implementation of
GCNs for event cameras without any pooling layers, and AEGNN [9], which inspired both EvGNN and this work and
incorporates 2D pooling.

5.2.1. Impact of MaxPool modifications
    We start our analysis with the impact on the quality results of the modifications we applied to the pooling layers,
which are shown in Table 4. In AEGNN, a 2D pooling method with an average position was introduced, while in
EvGNN the pooling layer was entirely omitted. Our results show that excluding the MaxPool significantly degrades
performance, primarily due to its role in data generalisation in subsequent stages of the model, leading to improved
results. Additionally, we observed that adopting a 3D pooling operation enhances accuracy by approximately 0.3-
0.4% compared to the 2D pooling method. In contrast, the use of divide position has a slight negative impact, reducing
accuracy by around 0.1-0.2%.

                                                                     15
Table 4: Ablation studies on MaxPool modifications on accuracy on the N-Cars dataset show that the incorporation of a 3D MaxPool enhances
overall performance. However, dividing the position component has been observed to slightly degrade the results. Bold indicates the configuration
used in the hardware implementation.


                               2D MaxPool             3D MaxPool                    Average P                 Divide P                           Accuracy
                                                                                                                                                    0.887
                                    ✓                                                     ✓                                                         0.918
                                    ✓                                                                                          ✓                    0.917
                                                                 ✓                        ✓                                                         0.922
                                                                 ✓                                                             ✓                    0.920

                                                 w. pooling        w/o pooling                                                                       vertices   edges


                                                                                                     111.63                                                              48.67




                                                                                                               Reduction to input
                100
 Total MFLOPs




                                                                                                                                    40
                                                                                          x50!
                                                                                  61.39

                 50                                                                                                                                              19.43
                                                                                                                                    20
                                                               30.69                                                                             13.38
                                             18.13
                                                                                                                                          6.15
                        3.18 3.18     1.23              2.16               1.18               2.21
                  0                                                                                                                  0


                                                                                                                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                    2
                           1




                                        2




                                                           3




                                                                             4




                                                                                               5




                                                                                                                                          ol




                                                                                                                                                                 ol
                        nv




                                      nv




                                                        nv




                                                                          nv




                                                                                            nv




                                                                                                                                         po




                                                                                                                                                                po
                      co




                                    co




                                                      co




                                                                        co




                                                                                          co




Figure 6: Comparison of the number of operations per second (left) and the number of vertices and edges (right) with and without the use of
MaxPool layers. The use of pooling significantly reduces both the number of operations and graph complexity.



    Next, we compared the impact of using MaxPool layers and their absence in terms of the graph size and required
operations. Figure 6 illustrates a comparison of the total number of FLOPs performed by individual convolutions and
the reduction in the number of vertices and edges in the graph. It can be observed that the number of FLOPs is closely
correlated with the number of edges, primarily due to the operation of the PointNetConv layer, which applies a linear
transformation to each connection. Without the pooling operation, neither the number of edges nor vertices decreases,
leading to 50 times more operations in subsequent convolutions, showing a major drawback of the EvGNN solution.
    These findings underscore the critical role of MaxPool layers, not only for improving qualitative results, but also
for enhancing computational efficiency.

5.2.2. Impact of all modifications
    To evaluate the impact of our convolution and graph generation modules along with the previously described
MaxPool layers, we compared them with two state-of-the-art models in terms of size and performance. The AEGNN
model consists of 7 SplineConv layers [56] with one 2D MaxPool layer and two skip-connections, while the EvGNN
model consists of 4 convolutional layers without any MaxPool layer.
    To gain more comprehensive understanding of how our methods influence model size and performance, we intro-
duced modified versions of both architectures: O-AEGNN and O-EvGNN. In these models, we replaced the original
graph generation, convolutional, and MaxPool layers with our custom modules. Additionally, in the O-EvGNN model,
we incorporated two MaxPool layers placed after the first and third convolutional layers.
    The results presented in Table 5 demonstrate the impact of the proposed modifications. For the AEGNN, replacing
SplineConv with our PointNetConv aggregation and adding our pooling strategy reduces the number of parameters
from 30.4k to 5.0k, while slightly improving accuracy. This reduction is mainly due to the relatively high parameter
cost of SplineConv layers [20]. For the EvGNN, adding our pooling and graph modules yields accuracy gains, while
also slightly reducing the number of parameters. In both cases, the modified versions (O-AEGNN and O-EvGNN)
are more compact and more accurate than their original counterparts, demonstrating that our design improves both

                                                                                          16
Table 5: Comparison of our methods with other architectures in terms of the number of parameters and accuracy for the N-Cars dataset. The results
demonstrate that our solution has a positive impact in both aspects.


                                        Model                        Accuracy                            Num. of parameters
                                     AEGNN                                  0.893                                    30.4k
                                     EvGNN                                  0.880                                     4.8k
                                     O-AEGNN                                0.898                                    5.0k
                                     O-EvGNN                                0.891                                    4.2k

                                                                             Small    Base               Large


                         92                                                                              20
          Accuracy [%]




                         90                                                                              15

                                                                                             Size [kB]
                         88                                                                              10


                         86                                                                              5
                                it



                                           t



                                                       t



                                                                it



                                                                            it




                                                                                                                 t



                                                                                                                       t



                                                                                                                                 it



                                                                                                                                        t



                                                                                                                                                 it
                                        bi



                                                     bi




                                                                                                              bi



                                                                                                                     bi




                                                                                                                                      bi
                                 b




                                                                 b



                                                                       -b




                                                                                                                                 b




                                                                                                                                                b
                              8-



                                     7-



                                                    8-



                                                              6-




                                                                                                              8-



                                                                                                                     7-



                                                                                                                              8-



                                                                                                                                      6-



                                                                                                                                             8-
                                                                        8
                                                  6+




                                                                     4+




                                                                                                                            6+




                                                                                                                                            4+
                                               (a) Accuracy                                                                (b) Size

Figure 7: Comparison of models accuracy and size for different precisions on the N-Cars dataset. The results indicate that quantisation to 6 bits
still enables high accuracy for each model.



hardware efficiency and task performance.

5.2.3. Quantisation precision
    Although our hardware implementation was designed for 8-bit precision, it is crucial to explore the potential
for quantising to lower bit precisions with QAT. In Figure 7, we compared the qualitative results and model sizes
for different bit-widths. We analysed standard 8-bit, 7-bit, and 6-bit quantisations, and experimented with mixed
precision quantisation, where part of the feature extraction was quantised to lower bit-widths (6/4 bits) while keeping
the classifier at 8 bits.
    The results show that 6-bit quantisation, which reduces the model size by approximately 23%, has a small impact
on model quality, while in the case of 4-bit quantisation there is a considerable degradation in performance. It is
worth noting that using 6-bit feature extractor with 8-bit classifier gives better results and size reduction of about 8%
compared to full 7-bit quantisation. In our models, where feature extraction part is implemented in the PL and the
classifier in the PS, this modification could be crucial for deploying complex models.

5.3. Comparison with other works
    In this Section, we compare our three models (Small, Base and Large) with the state-of-the-art based on the N-
Cars, N-Caltech101, CIFAR10-DVS, and MNIST-DVS datasets. The results in terms of accuracy, FLOPs per event,
and network size are presented in Table 6. We primarily selected methods that use graph-based event representations
[18, 8, 9, 12], but also included other asynchronous methods, such as SNNs [31] and dense neural networks [26, 23].
Although FLOPs per event is a widely used normalised proxy for computational complexity in software-oriented
comparisons, and provides a useful indication of the overall complexity trend of a given model, it does not fully
characterise implementation cost on FPGA platforms, where factors such as numerical precision, memory access

                                                                                     17
Table 6: Comparison with other methods of object classification for Float32 models. The results show that our models are among the smallest in
terms of the number of parameters and exhibit the lowest computational complexity per event, while achieving results comparable to the state-of-
the-art. The values obtained from the open source code are in parentheses.

                                                            N-Cars                         N-Caltech101                   CIFAR10-DVS                 MNIST-DVS
    Model                Repr.        Async.      Acc. ↑           MFLOPs/ev ↓        Acc. ↑        MFLOPs/ev ↓    Acc. ↑     MFLOPs/ev ↓       Acc. ↑       MFLOPs/ev ↓       # Param. ↓
 H-First [31]         Spike               ✓        0.561                -             0.054              -           -              -               -              -                -
 HATS [50]         Time-Surface           ✓        0.902              0.03            0.642             4.3        0.524          0.18            0.984          0.18               -
 YOLE [26]          Voxel-Grid            ✓        0.927             328.16           0.702            3659          -              -             0.961            -             2.03 M
 AsyNet [23]        Voxel-Grid            ✓        0.944              21.5            0.745            202         0.663          103             0.994          112             3.69 M
 G-CNNs [18]          Graph               ✗        0.902                 -             0.630             -         0.515           -              0.974           -              4.93 M
RG-CNNs [18]          Graph               ✗        0.914                 -             0.657             -         0.540           -              0.986           -              5.10 M
  NvS-S [8]           Graph               ✓        0.915                5.2            0.670            7.8        0.602          22.8            0.986          10.1         0.36 - 1.16 M
  EvS-S [8]           Graph               ✓        0.931                6.1            0.761           11.5        0.680          33.2            0.991          15.2         0.36 - 1.16 M
 AEGNN [9]            Graph               ✓    0.945 (0.893)           0.47        0.668 (0.643)       7.31          -             -                -             -           0.03 - 20.4 M
 EvGNN [12]           Graph               ✓        0.880              0.063              -               -           -             -                -             -               4.8 k
  EFGCN-S             Graph               ✓        0.907              0.032           0.623            0.004       0.571          0.011           0.964          0.006         5.2 - 55.5 k
  EFGCN-B             Graph               ✓        0.920              0.060           0.631            0.008       0.588          0.022           0.978          0.012        10.6 - 111.0 k
  EFGCN-L             Graph               ✓        0.923              0.111           0.639            0.015       0.613          0.040           0.983          0.022        20.2 - 220.9 k


                Table 7: Comparison of the EFGCN with the SOTA in terms of resource utilisation, accuracy and latency on SoC FPGAs.

                                                                     Utilisation                                   Accuracy [%]                                     Latency
   Model        Graph size       Time window    LUT         FF      BlockRAM       UltraRAM    DSP    N-Cars   N-Caltech101    CIFAR      MNIST      PL [ms]     PL+PS [ms]     per ev. [µ s]
 EFGCN-S           128             100 ms      43553       15292       121.5          0        90      91.0         -           57.4       98.7           3.78       4.39           6.56
 EFGCN-B           128             100 ms      53517       18798        162           0        90      91.9         -           59.1       97.9           4.62       5.77           9.44
 EFGCN-L           128             100 ms      65901       24622       211.5          0        90      92.5         -           61.5       98.5           7.03       9.31          13.76
 EFGCN-S           256              50 ms      112670      24087        149           12       172        -        62.8           -         -             4.42       5.12           4.02
 EFGCN-B           256              50 ms      139382      29401       187.5          12       184        -        63.2           -         -             4.43       5.77           4.04
 EFGCN-L           256              50 ms      142773      38882        240           12       1364       -        64.1           -         -             4.43       7.11           4.04
EvGNN [12]      120 × 100             -        30908    24083           15            48       228     87.8         -             -         -               -            -           16
 ESDA [44]      180 × 240             -        154000   115000         1278           0        1792     -          72.4           -         -             3.09           -           -




patterns, and data movement also play a major role. For this reason, the comparison in Table 6 should be interpreted
together with the hardware-level resource utilisation and latency analysis reported in Table 7.
    A few conclusions can be drawn from the results. First, our models achieve the lowest FLOPs per event among the
compared methods on all datasets for which this metric is available. The difference is particularly large with respect
to dense asynchronous approaches such as YOLE and AsyNet, reaching more than three orders of magnitude in some
cases. Compared with prior graph-based methods, our EFGCN also maintains a favourable complexity profile; for
example, EvGNN, despite using fewer parameters than our Base model, still requires a higher number of FLOPs
per event. This indicates that the proposed 3D MaxPool-based design provides a substantial computational advantage.
Second, our models are among the smallest in terms of the number of parameters, with only EvGNN being smaller. At
the same time, the substantially larger models, such as AEGNN, do not translate into a proportionally better efficiency-
accuracy trade-off; for the N-Caltech101, the gap in parameter count reaches up to two orders of magnitude.
    In terms of accuracy, our Small model outperforms G-CNNs, HATS, EvGNN, and YOLE on individual datasets.
Our Large model performs better than NvS-S, while remaining close to YOLE on the N-Cars, AEGNN and HATS
on the N-Caltech101, and EvS-S on the MNIST-DVS. It should also be noted that some graph-based methods use
relatively large edge-generation radius (e.g. 5 in AEGNN for the N-Caltech101 and 5 in NvS-S/EvS-S for all datasets),
which has a strong impact on accuracy, as analysed in detail in the supplementary material.

5.4. Evaluation of hardware implementation
    In Table 7, we present a comparison with the solutions proposed in the literature on event-based object classifica-
tion systems implemented in FPGAs in terms of resource utilisation, model accuracy after quantisation and latency.

   We implemented each of the EFGCN network models (Small, Base, Large) for hardware testing and evaluation.
Our design was presented in the form of a demonstration during 2025 CVPR conference [49].




                                                                                              18
Table 8: Experimental results demonstrating the scalability of EFGCN illustrated using the Small model (graph size 128), for varying numbers of
vector multipliers (m) and quantisation to 8 and 6 bits.


                                      Utilisation                                  Accuracy [%]                          Latency
    Model            LUT           FF        BlockRAM          DSP         N-Cars     CIFAR       MNIST         PL [ms]       per ev. [µ s]
8-bit, m = 1         41350       12960          121.5            88         91.0       57.4          98.7         3.78             6.56
6-bit, m = 1         31332       10886           95              88         90.7       57.2          98.5         3.78             6.56
8-bit, m = 2         66001       16011          121.5           112         91.0       57.4          98.7         1.93             3.66
8-bit, m = 4        114513       21608          121.5           160         91.0       57.4          98.7         1.02             2.21


5.4.1. Resource utilisation
    As presented in Table 7, our design demonstrates high scalability and adaptability across different model sizes and
input resolutions. As the graph size and feature dimensionality increase, both logic and memory utilisation naturally
grow. However, this can be controlled by adjusting the number of parallel multiplications according to the available
hardware resources and throughput requirements. In this work, we assume the worst-case scenario regarding data
sparsity – that is, the throughput is designed to handle all possible nodes with all possible connections. The prominent
increase in logic utilisation observed for models implemented with the β = 256 results from the larger number of
parallel multipliers. A detailed analysis of the impact of individual system components and successive hardware
modules on the overall system utilisation is presented in the supplementary material.
    DSP utilisation also depends on the number of parallel multipliers, as they are required for requantisation. For
Large model with the β = 256 configuration, part of the multiplication operations was implemented using DSPs
instead of LUTs to reduce LUT usage, which explains the variable DSP utilisation.
    The direct impact of the number of multipliers on resource utilisation is presented in Table 8, using the Small
model with β = 128 as an example. Increasing the number of parallel multipliers directly translates into higher
usage of logic resources (used for multiplication) and DSP blocks (used for requantisation). The number of parallel
multipliers does not affect memory consumption in the system, since both the number of weights and the stored feature
maps remain unchanged.
    While increasing graph sizes pose a challenge for our method, as they lead to higher resource utilisation, future
work will focus on processing dynamically updated voxel graphs, where each vertex represents events generated
by multiple pixels. This approach should enable efficient processing of data captured by higher-resolution sensors
without the need to increase the graph size.
    Table 8 also presents system utilisation with quantisation applied to both weights and feature maps reduced to 6
bits instead of 8 bits. Reducing numerical precision leads to lower memory consumption as well as reduced usage of
LUTs/FFs (for feature vector buffering and vector multiplication). DSP utilisation remains unchanged, as DSP blocks
are used exclusively for requantisation performed on 32-bit values.

5.4.2. Latency
    The latency of the PL (graph generation, feature extraction) is defined as the time between the registration of
the last event in a given sequence and the reception of the final feature map in the PS. The total latency, including
additional processing of the network’s head, is defined as PL+PS latency. Processing times in the PL part were
measured using the ILA (Integrated Logic Analyser) tool, while the total latency (with the PS) was measured with
timing functions available in the Vitis software.
    The proposed EFGCN model enables predictions to be generated every 25 ms with latency of 4.39-9.31 ms (for the
configuration with TIME_WINDOW = 100 ms), or every 12.5 ms with a latency of 5.12-7.11 ms (for the configuration
with TIME_WINDOW = 50 ms). Moreover, the use of elements with fixed latency only (no access to external memory
for convolutional layers) allowed for the determination of a constant system throughput of 13.3 MEPS, the value not
achievable for alternative solutions.
    The analysis of the achieved latency leads to some interesting conclusions. Firstly, for models with TIME_WINDOW
= 100 ms configuration, increasing the model size leads to higher latency, because for each convolution we set


                                                                      19
a number of parallel multipliers m = 1. As the feature map sizes increase, the number of necessary multiplications
grows, and consequently, the time required to perform them.
    This issue does not occur in TIME_WINDOW = 50 ms configuration. Regardless of the feature map sizes, the
measured latency remains similar – close to 4.43 ms. With more stringent throughput requirements, different multipli-
cation strategies were adopted for each layer. The larger the number of elements in the feature map, the more parallel
multipliers were used. As a result, the amount of utilised resources increases, but the latency remains constant.
    Based on these observations, it can be concluded that in the proposed system latency and resource usage are
correlated. This assumption was confirmed by the experiment documented in Table 8. As the number of parallel
multipliers increases, the system latency decreases. By relying exclusively on internal memory resources and pro-
viding direct low-latency access to the corresponding features, the system latency for a given configuration of graph
convolution modules becomes predictable. Appropriate architectural configuration should be thus motivated by the
specific requirements set for the given application.

5.4.3. Power consumption
    Using the Vivado Power Analysis tool, we estimated that the total power consumption of the programmable logic
for each configuration ranges from 1.83 W (Small model, β = 128) to 5.48 W (Large model, β = 256). It should
be noted, however, that the actual power usage strongly depends on input toggle rates, while event data is inherently
sparse across all dimensions. Based on this observation, we can assume that the real power consumption associated
with processing actual event data on hardware would be lower.
    To validate this assumption, we performed a detailed power analysis in Vivado for the Base model, using input
toggle rates estimated from post-implementation simulations on a representative sample from the DVS-MNIST/N-
Caltech101 datasets (achieving 99.9% of annotated nets). Under these conditions, the estimated power consumption
of the PL decreased from 2.6 W (baseline estimation for β = 128) to 1.23 W, and from 5.34 W (baseline estimation
for β = 256) to 1.86 W.
    For future work, we plan to conduct a comprehensive study of the actual power consumption of the EFGCN
implemented on the ZCU104 platform, as well as its dependence on scene dynamics (i.e. the number of events per
second).
    The estimated power used by the PS part (ARM processor) is 2.64 W, regardless of the selected configuration
and model. Nevertheless, the network’s head could easily be integrated into the programmable logic, which would
considerably reduce latency and power consumption with only a minor impact on resource utilisation. The final linear
layers could be computed with limited parallelism, as this operation is performed infrequently – once every 25 ms (for
larger graphs) or 12.5 ms.

5.4.4. Comparison with other hardware implementations
    With the limited number of experiments conducted by alternative solutions, direct comparison is possible using
only the N-Cars and the N-Caltech101 datasets.
    For the N-Cars dataset, our method achieves the highest accuracy scores among all those proposed in the liter-
ature for each GCN model (Small, Base, and Large). Moreover, our Small model achieves a 3.2% higher accuracy
than EvGNN [12], with 41% higher LUT utilisation, while simultaneously reducing FF resources by 36%, DSPs by
60%, and internal memory resources by 70% (estimation based on a 32 kb capacity for BlockRAM and 288 kb for
UltraRAM). Therefore, our Small model achieves higher accuracy and lower value of MFLOPs/ev than the EvGNN
model. In the EvGNN paper [12], the system latency for entire sequences was not measured, and instead, latency per
event was used as the metric. To enable a direct comparison of these methods, Table 7 also presents the per-event
latency calculated as the sum of the delays of the individual hardware modules. However, it should be noted that this
metric is not perfect for our method, as it does not reflect its operational nature (primarily due to the synchronisation
of computations and feature map buffering induced by the MaxPool layers – Section 4).
    While some of the hardware-aware optimisations proposed in our previous work (the use of a directed graph [21]
and PointNetConv [20]) are applied both in the proposed system EFGCN and in EvGNN, the key difference between
those methods is the three-dimensional MaxPool mechanism employed in our approach, which enables exploitation
of the temporal sparsity of the data and improved scalability achieved through sequential multiplications in the Point-
NetConv layers. The system described in the former achieves low latency by processing events asynchronously for
the entire network. However, it should be emphasised that in doing so, the authors opted out of data scaling between
                                                           20
convolutional layers, which leads to a significant increase in computational complexity (Section 4). To maintain low
latency in the system, feature maps of small sizes (maximum of 32 elements) were used, and a matrix multiplication
strategy based on a high level of parallelism (MAC engine per output channel) was adopted.
    By using 3D MaxPool, EFGCN offers better scalability through efficient computations, achieving higher classifi-
cation accuracy with the use of fewer resources. With the aggregation of vertices over time and the use of an on-chip
memory with constant latency, it is possible to derive strict throughput requirements for subsequent graph convolu-
tions and accordingly adapt the computational architecture. This also enables the use of higher feature dimensionality.
The ability to configure the level of parallelism in matrix multiplication allows for adjusting the achieved latency to
the specific computer vision problem. In the case of EvGNN, on the other hand, increasing the size of individual
feature maps or the number of layers impacts both latency and resource usage.
    At the same time, with 3D MaxPool the number of features that must be stored in memory for each graph convolu-
tion module has also been reduced, as well as the number of required computations, through an effective reduction of
the search radius from 3 to 1. This minimises the maximum number of matrix multiplications and memory accesses
from 29 to 18.
    In summary, the EFGCN is more scalable for deeper models, data with higher resolutions and greater dynamics.
    It should also be emphasised that the EvGNN system utilises external DDR memory resources, which leads to
variable latency and significantly increases power consumption. In the literature, it is commonly assumed that access
to external DRAM memory is 10–1000 × more energy-expensive than access to on-chip memory [57]. In [12], it was
shown that over 50% of system latency and 73% of energy consumption are attributable to DRAM communication.
This type of overhead has been eliminated in EFGCN through the exclusive use of an on-chip memory. It should be
noted, however, that for the EvGNN model, power consumption is reported only for the ASIC implementation, which
makes a direct comparison with our model infeasible.
    In the case of the N-Caltech101 dataset, our module allows for classification with accuracy ranging from 62.8%
to 64.1%. The ESDA system proposed in [44], which utilises sparse convolutional neural networks, achieves higher
accuracy. However, the resource utilisation of this method is higher across all considered elements. The main issue
is the very high usage of internal memory resources (between 5.3 and 8.5 times higher compared to the individual
EFGCN models). Implementing ESDA for the ZCU104 platform considered in this paper would not be feasible
due to the usage of FF, DSP, and BlockRAM resources exceeding the available number of elements (in the case of
BlockRAMs – 4 times). At the same time, given the motivation related to the use of event-based cameras for mobile
robotics, limiting resource utilisation is one of our priorities.
    While the latency of 3.09 ms achieved in the ESDA model is nominally lower than the one achieved by EFGCN, it
is important to consider the differences in operation. Due to the use of two-dimensional event-frame representations,
systems utilising convolutional neural networks require prior data buffering and frame generation. In contrast, our
system processes events directly as soon as they are registered. EFGCN allows for predictions 4 times more frequently
than the TIME_WINDOW value, thus providing greater throughput than a solution requiring prior data accumulation.
    The achieved power consumption values are higher than those obtained in the ESDA model (1.81 W measured
during runtime for FPGA fabric using the built-in power monitor controlled by the PMB). However, it is impor-
tant to emphasise the differences in methodology (estimation vs measurement) as well as the fact that in the ESDA
model the representation generation in the processor part of the system is necessary (introducing additional power
requirements).

5.5. Comparison with embedded GPU
    To evaluate the time and energy efficiency of our method compared to alternative embedded platforms, a reference
implementation was created on the Jetson Orin NX eGPU platform. This system features an ARM Cortex-A78
processor and an NVIDIA Ampere GPU. Testing conditions similar to the FPGA configuration were reproduced
by implementing a graph generator in C++, operating on a single CPU core. This generator reads events from the
memory according to their timestamps, simulating the operation of a real event camera.
    The resulting graph was then processed in parallel by the model on both CUDA and CPU platforms at two power
levels: 10 W and 25 W. Figure 8 presents the average total power consumption and latency for all datasets. Due to the
small size of the tested models, differences in processing times between EFGCN variants were minimal; therefore,
a detailed analysis is provided only for the Base model.

                                                          21
                                                             CUDA 25 W             CPU 25 W                 CUDA 10 W            CPU 10 W              FPGA

                  10
                               8.56                                      8.29                                            8.35                                        8.52
                   8                          6.82                                      6.64                                            6.72                  6.76                    6.85
                        6.48                                                                                                                                                6.43
      Power [W]




                                       6.09                      6.14                                             6.18           5.89
                                                                                 5.76
                   6
                                                                                                                                                                                             4.5
                                                      3.87                                      3.87                                            3.87
                   4
                   2
                   0
                                 CIFAR                                     MNIST                                           N-Cars                                N-Caltech101
                                                                                                                                                                     1,201.9          1,432.5
                               898.2          983.6
                  103
   Latency [ms]




                                                                                                                         265.8          308.9
                                                                         133.2          143.2
                  102
                        22.8           27.1                                                                                       22                          25.9             28.2
                                                                  18.3           21.3                             19.8

                    1                                 5.77                                      5.77                                            5.77                                            5.77
                  10

                                  CIFAR                                     MNIST                                           N-Cars                                   N-Caltech101

Figure 8: Power consumption and inference latency of the Base model on the Jetson Orin NX in two power modes (10 W and 25 W), using either
the CPU or CUDA cores, compared with the proposed implementation for the ZCU104 SoC FPGA.



    Propagation times for models running on the CUDA platform ranged from 18.3 to 22.8 ms at 25 W and from 22.0
to 27.1 ms at 10 W for the CIFAR10-DVS, MNIST-DVS, and N-Cars datasets. Compared to the slowest hardware
configuration (EFGCN-L with PL+PS mode), a speed-up of 2.6–3.2 and 3.0–3.9 times for FPGA was achieved, re-
spectively. Additionally, the average graph generation time was 0.57–0.63 ms for the CPU on the Jetson platform,
while FPGA implementation required only 75 µs (15 clock cycles at a 200 MHz frequency). Considering this differ-
ence, the FPGA platform offers an overall speed-up of 7.6–8.4× with comparable power consumption. Moreover, the
average data transfer time from CPU to CUDA was 3.5 ms, introducing additional latency to the system.
    Similar tests conducted exclusively on CPU-based models indicated even greater advantage of the FPGA imple-
mentation, achieving speed-ups of 18.9–
127.8 times (25 W) and 20.4–139.9 times (10 W), with comparable graph generation times and without the need of
data transfer to CUDA.
    The presented results confirm the significant advantage of the proposed hardware implementation of graph convo-
lutional networks over solutions utilising embedded GPU systems.


6. Limitations

    In this section we define the current limitations of our system and outline the methods planned to address them
with the further research on applying the accelerator to more complex computer vision tasks (e.g. object detection).
    To increase data resolution and allow smaller temporal windows, a higher number of parallel multipliers is re-
quired. Consequently, the consumption of logic resources would increase. We plan to investigate techniques aimed
at optimisation of multiplications (e.g. further utilisation of DSP resources with DSP packing). Additionally, we
plan to explore the application of pruning techniques for the considered GCN model. Removing certain weights in
the model would reduce both memory (sparse features) and logic resource usage (fewer multiplications required for
a given graph convolutional layer).
    In the current implementation, we support only a fixed graph edge search radius of R = 3. We plan to evaluate
the system with other values and conduct studies on their accuracy and efficiency. For more complex computer
vision tasks, skip-connections are a widely used technique. We plan to integrate this mechanism by utilising external
memory in a way that preserves the system’s fixed latency. Furthermore, we are considering the implementation of
a voxel-graph approach, where representing multiple events with a single node could significantly reduce the required
memory and logic resources.


                                                                                                       22
   Finally, we plan to limit the use of the processing system in order to further reduce both power consumption
and system latency. We aim to achieve this, by implementing the network’s classification head with the AI Engines
specific to the AMD Versal platform, instead of relying on the PS.


7. Summary

     In this work, we presented a hardware implementation of a graph convolutional neural network for event data
processing on a SoC FPGA platform. The developed system enables continuous event data processing, generating
predictions for the last 50/100 ms (depending on the configuration) while maintaining a fourfold increase in output
frequency. Extensive evaluations across multiple models, configurations, and datasets demonstrate that the proposed
approach outperforms existing methods in classification accuracy, computational efficiency, and hardware resource
utilisation. Notably, our implementation operates without any off-chip external memory, leading to reduced power
consumption. Moreover, we demonstrated the superior performance of the proposed hardware system compared to
other platforms, namely the CPU and GPU.
     Our solution surpasses state-of-the-art methods while offering high scalability. By leveraging the inherent tempo-
ral sparsity of event data and 3D MaxPool layers, we reduce FPGA logic utilisation through sequential computation
of selected operations. Furthermore, the system establishes a direct trade-off between latency and resource utilisa-
tion – allowing for configuration adjustments that optimise one metric at the expense of the other, depending on the
application’s requirements.
     As part of future work, we plan to introduce additional hardware optimisations, such as initial voxelisation of the
graph, to reduce both representation size and computational complexity. Additionally, we aim to integrate techniques
that enhance the training process, including pruning and skip-connections. The ultimate goal is to develop a fully
hardware-accelerated GCNN capable of real-time event-based object detection. This work addresses the application
of our method for event-based vision, but it can also be used for other types of spatio-temporal point cloud data.


8. Acknowledgements

    This work was supported by the “Excellence initiative – research university” programme for AGH University of
Kraków, the Polish National Science Centre projects 2024/53/N/ST6/04254 and 2024/53/N/ST6/04331, Polish high-
performance computing infrastructure PLGrid (HPC Center: ACK Cyfronet AGH – grant no. PLG/2023/016897) and
16.16.120.773 for the AGH University of Krakow.


References

 [1] F. K. Konstantinidis, S. G. Mouroutsos, A. Gasteratos, The role of machine vision in industry 4.0: an automotive
     manufacturing perspective, in: 2021 IEEE International Conference on Imaging Systems and Techniques (IST),
     2021, pp. 1–6. doi:10.1109/IST50367.2021.9651453.
 [2] L. Bodenhagen, A. R. Fugl, A. Jordt, M. Willatzen, K. A. Andersen, M. M. Olsen, R. Koch, H. G. Petersen,
     N. Krüger, An adaptable robot vision system performing manipulation actions with flexible objects, IEEE trans-
     actions on automation science and engineering 11 (3) (2014) 749–765.
 [3] T.-H. Pham, A. Kheddar, A. Qammaz, A. A. Argyros, Towards force sensing from vision: Observing hand-
     object interactions to infer manipulation forces, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
     pattern recognition, 2015, pp. 2810–2819.

 [4] P. Lichtsteiner, C. Posch, T. Delbruck, A 128× 128 120 db 15 µs latency asynchronous temporal contrast vision
     sensor, IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits 43 (2) (2008) 566–576. doi:10.1109/JSSC.2007.914337.
 [5] S. Afshar, N. Ralph, Y. Xu, J. Tapson, A. v. Schaik, G. Cohen, Event-based feature extraction using adaptive
     selection thresholds, Sensors 20 (6) (2020) 1600.


                                                          23
 [6] R. Ghosh, A. Mishra, G. Orchard, N. V. Thakor, Real-time object recognition and orientation estimation us-
     ing an event-based camera and cnn, in: 2014 IEEE Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference (BioCAS)
     Proceedings, 2014, pp. 544–547. doi:10.1109/BioCAS.2014.6981783.
 [7] E. Perot, P. De Tournemire, D. Nitti, J. Masci, A. Sironi, Learning to detect objects with a 1 megapixel event
     camera, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33 (2020) 16639–16652.

 [8] Y. Li, H. Zhou, B. Yang, Y. Zhang, Z. Cui, H. Bao, G. Zhang, Graph-based asynchronous event processing for
     rapid object recognition, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021,
     pp. 934–943.
 [9] S. Schaefer, D. Gehrig, D. Scaramuzza, Aegnn: Asynchronous event-based graph neural networks, in: Proceed-
     ings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2022, pp. 12371–12381.
[10] D. Gehrig, D. Scaramuzza, Pushing the limits of asynchronous graph-based object detection with event cameras,
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12324 (2022).
[11] T. Kryjak, Event-based vision on fpgas–a survey, arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.08356 (2024).

[12] Y. Yang, A. Kneip, C. Frenkel, Evgnn: An event-driven graph neural network accelerator for edge vision, arXiv
     preprint arXiv:1503.02531 (2024).
[13] Z. Wang, Z. Que, W. Luk, H. Fan, Customizable fpga-based accelerator for binarized graph neural networks, in:
     2022 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), 2022, pp. 1968–1972. doi:10.1109/
     ISCAS48785.2022.9937817.

[14] Z. Tao, C. Wu, Y. Liang, K. Wang, L. He, Lw-gcn: A lightweight fpga-based graph convolutional network
     accelerator, ACM Transactions on Reconfigurable Technology and Systems 16 (1) (2022) 1–19.
[15] H. Zhou, B. Zhang, R. Kannan, V. Prasanna, C. Busart, Model-architecture co-design for high performance
     temporal gnn inference on fpga, in: 2022 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium
     (IPDPS), 2022, pp. 1108–1117. doi:10.1109/IPDPS53621.2022.00111.

[16] Y. Sekikawa, K. Hara, H. Saito, Eventnet: Asynchronous recursive event processing, in: Proceedings of the
     IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2019, pp. 3887–3896.
[17] Q. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. Yuan, Y. Lu, Space-time event clouds for gesture recognition: From rgb cameras to event
     cameras, in: 2019 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), 2019, pp. 1826–1835.
     doi:10.1109/WACV.2019.00199.
[18] Y. Bi, A. Chadha, A. Abbas, E. Bourtsoulatze, Y. Andreopoulos, Graph-based object classification for neuro-
     morphic vision sensing, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, 2019,
     pp. 491–501.
[19] A. Mitrokhin, Z. Hua, C. Fermüller, Y. Aloimonos, Learning visual motion segmentation using event surfaces,
     in: 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020, pp. 14402–14411.
     doi:10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.01442.
[20] K. Jeziorek, A. Pinna, T. Kryjak, Memory-efficient graph convolutional networks for object classification and
     detection with event cameras, in: 2023 Signal Processing: Algorithms, Architectures, Arrangements, and Appli-
     cations (SPA), 2023, pp. 160–165. doi:10.23919/SPA59660.2023.10274464.

[21] K. Jeziorek, P. Wzorek, K. Blachut, A. Pinna, T. Kryjak, Optimising graph representation for hardware imple-
     mentation of graph convolutional networks for event-based vision, arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04988 (2024).
[22] W. Yan, W. Tong, X. Zhi, Fpgan: An fpga accelerator for graph attention networks with software and hardware
     co-optimization, IEEE Access 8 (2020) 171608–171620. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3023946.

                                                        24
[23] N. Messikommer, D. Gehrig, A. Loquercio, D. Scaramuzza, Event-based asynchronous sparse convolutional
     networks, in: Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020,
     Proceedings, Part VIII 16, Springer, 2020, pp. 415–431.
[24] H. Rebecq, R. Ranftl, V. Koltun, D. Scaramuzza, High speed and high dynamic range video with an event
     camera, IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 43 (6) (2019) 1964–1980.

[25] D. Gehrig, A. Loquercio, K. G. Derpanis, D. Scaramuzza, End-to-end learning of representations for asyn-
     chronous event-based data, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
     2019, pp. 5633–5643.
[26] M. Cannici, M. Ciccone, A. Romanoni, M. Matteucci, Asynchronous convolutional networks for object detec-
     tion in neuromorphic cameras, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
     Recognition Workshops, 2019, pp. 0–0.
[27] A. Sabater, L. Montesano, A. C. Murillo, Event transformer. a sparse-aware solution for efficient event data
     processing, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)
     Workshops, 2022.

[28] M. Gehrig, D. Scaramuzza, Recurrent vision transformers for object detection with event cameras, in: Proceed-
     ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023.
[29] Y. Peng, Y. Zhang, Z. Xiong, X. Sun, F. Wu, Get: Group event transformer for event-based vision, in: Proceed-
     ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2023, pp. 6038–6048.

[30] J. H. Lee, T. Delbruck, M. Pfeiffer, Training deep spiking neural networks using backpropagation, Frontiers in
     neuroscience 10 (2016) 508.
[31] G. Orchard, C. Meyer, R. Etienne-Cummings, C. Posch, N. Thakor, R. Benosman, Hfirst: A temporal approach
     to object recognition, IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 37 (10) (2015) 2028–2040.
[32] M. Gehrig, S. B. Shrestha, D. Mouritzen, D. Scaramuzza, Event-based angular velocity regression with spiking
     networks, in: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE, 2020, pp. 4195–
     4202.
[33] M. Yao, H. Gao, G. Zhao, D. Wang, Y. Lin, Z. Yang, G. Li, Temporal-wise attention spiking neural networks for
     event streams classification, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
     2021, pp. 10221–10230.

[34] L. Cordone, B. Miramond, S. Ferrante, Learning from event cameras with sparse spiking convolutional neural
     networks, in: 2021 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–8.
[35] S. Barchid, J. Mennesson, J. Eshraghian, C. Djéraba, M. Bennamoun, Spiking neural networks for frame-based
     and event-based single object localization, Neurocomputing 559 (2023) 126805.

[36] Y. Zhou, G. Gallego, X. Lu, S. Liu, S. Shen, Event-based motion segmentation with spatio-temporal graph cuts,
     IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 34 (8) (2021) 4868–4880.
[37] D. Gehrig, D. Scaramuzza, Low-latency automotive vision with event cameras, Nature 629 (8014) (2024) 1034–
     1040.

[38] G. J. García, C. A. Jara, J. Pomares, A. Alabdo, L. M. Poggi, F. Torres, A survey on fpga-based sensor systems:
     towards intelligent and reconfigurable low-power sensors for computer vision, control and signal processing,
     Sensors 14 (4) (2014) 6247–6278.
[39] X. Lagorce, G. Orchard, F. Galluppi, B. E. Shi, R. B. Benosman, Hots: a hierarchy of event-based time-surfaces
     for pattern recognition, IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 39 (7) (2016) 1346–1359.

                                                         25
[40] B. Ramesh, A. Ussa, L. Della Vedova, H. Yang, G. Orchard, Low-power dynamic object detection and classifi-
     cation with freely moving event cameras, Frontiers in neuroscience 14 (2020) 505328.
[41] L. A. Camunas-Mesa, Y. L. Domínguez-Cordero, A. Linares-Barranco, T. Serrano-Gotarredona, B. Linares-
     Barranco, A configurable event-driven convolutional node with rate saturation mechanism for modular convnet
     systems implementation, Frontiers in neuroscience 12 (2018) 63.

[42] J. Zhang, L. Feng, T. Wang, W. Shi, Y. Wang, G. Zhang, Fpga-based implementation of an event-driven spiking
     multi-kernel convolution architecture, IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs 69 (3)
     (2021) 1682–1686.
[43] A. Linares-Barranco, A. Rios-Navarro, S. Canas-Moreno, E. Piñero-Fuentes, R. Tapiador-Morales, T. Delbruck,
     Dynamic vision sensor integration on fpga-based cnn accelerators for high-speed visual classification, in: Inter-
     national Conference on Neuromorphic Systems 2021, 2021, pp. 1–7.
[44] Y. Gao, B. Zhang, Y. Ding, H. K.-H. So, A composable dynamic sparse dataflow architecture for efficient event-
     based vision processing on fpga, in: Proceedings of the 2024 ACM/SIGDA International Symposium on Field
     Programmable Gate Arrays, 2024, pp. 246–257.

[45] T. Dalgaty, T. Mesquida, D. Joubert, A. Sironi, P. Vivet, C. Posch, Hugnet: Hemi-spherical update graph neu-
     ral network applied to low-latency event-based optical flow, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
     Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops, 2023, pp. 3953–3962.
[46] M. Fey, J. E. Lenssen, Fast graph representation learning with PyTorch Geometric, in: ICLR Workshop on
     Representation Learning on Graphs and Manifolds, 2019.

[47] C. R. Qi, L. Yi, H. Su, L. J. Guibas, Pointnet++: Deep hierarchical feature learning on point sets in a metric
     space, Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017).
[48] B. Jacob, S. Kligys, B. Chen, M. Zhu, M. Tang, A. Howard, H. Adam, D. Kalenichenko, Quantization and train-
     ing of neural networks for efficient integer-arithmetic-only inference, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
     computer vision and pattern recognition, 2018, pp. 2704–2713.
[49] P. Wzorek, K. Blachut, K. Jeziorek, T. Kryjak, Live demonstration: Real-time event-data processing with graph
     convolutional neural networks and soc fpga, in: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
     Conference, 2025, pp. 5103–5104.
[50] A. Sironi, M. Brambilla, N. Bourdis, X. Lagorce, R. Benosman, Hats: Histograms of averaged time surfaces for
     robust event-based object classification, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
     recognition, 2018, pp. 1731–1740.
[51] G. Orchard, A. Jayawant, G. K. Cohen, N. Thakor, Converting static image datasets to spiking neuromorphic
     datasets using saccades, Frontiers in neuroscience 9 (2015) 159859.

[52] H. Li, H. Liu, X. Ji, G. Li, L. Shi, Cifar10-dvs: An event-stream dataset for object classification, Frontiers in
     Neuroscience 11 (2017). doi:10.3389/fnins.2017.00309.
     URL      https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnins.2017.
     00309
[53] T. Serrano-Gotarredona, B. Linares-Barranco, Poker-dvs and mnist-dvs. their history, how they were made, and
     other details, Frontiers in Neuroscience 9 (2015). doi:10.3389/fnins.2015.00481.
     URL      https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnins.2015.
     00481
[54] A. Paszke, S. Gross, S. Chintala, G. Chanan, E. Yang, Z. DeVito, Z. Lin, A. Desmaison, L. Antiga, A. Lerer,
     Automatic differentiation in pytorch (2017).

                                                         26
[55] D. P. Kingma, Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 (2014).
[56] M. Fey, J. E. Lenssen, F. Weichert, H. Müller, Splinecnn: Fast geometric deep learning with continuous b-spline
     kernels, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2018, pp. 869–877.
[57] M. Horowitz, 1.1 computing’s energy problem (and what we can do about it), in: 2014 IEEE international
     solid-state circuits conference digest of technical papers (ISSCC), IEEE, 2014, pp. 10–14.




                                                        27
                      Kamil Jeziorek received the Master of Science degree in Automation and Robotics in 2023 at
AGH University of Kraków, Poland. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree at the Department of Automatics and
Robotics, Laboratory of Vision Systems, under the supervision of Prof. dr hab. inż. Marek Gorgoń. His research
interests include embedded vision systems based on event-driven cameras, graph neural networks, and hardware
acceleration of deep learning pipelines on FPGA platforms.




                      Piotr Wzorek received his Engineering Degree in Automation and Robotics in 2020 and his
Master of Science degree in Intelligent Control Systems in 2021. He is currently pursuing a Ph.D. degree and works
as a research assistant at AGH University of Krakow. His research interests include the application of neuromorphic
sensors for mobile robotics, the acceleration of deep learning architectures, and perception systems for embedded
platforms, mainly for SoC FPGAs.




                       Krzysztof Błachut received the Master of Science degree in 2019 in Automation and Robotics at
AGH University of Krakow, where is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree and working as research assistant. His pro-
fessional interests include embedded vision systems, autonomous vehicles, video surveillance systems, event cameras
and heterogeneous computing platforms such as SoC FPGAs and eGPUs.




                      Andrea Pinna received the engineer diploma in microelectronic from the University of Genoa
(Italy), in 1999, and the Ph.D. degree in electronic system from the University Pierre and Marie Curie (Paris – France),
in 2003. He was an Associate Professor from 2004 to 2022 at Sorbonne University (previously Pierre and Marie
Curie University) in Paris, France. Between 2006 and 2011, he worked in the industrial and semiconductor sector as a
Project Manager for innovative and technology transfer projects. He joined the Lip6 laboratory at Sorbonne University
in 2011 and has been a full professor since September 2023. His main research works are designing intelligent med-
ical devices based on embedded systems to support data analysis and diagnosis. He also explores reconfigurable and
edge-computing architectures and vision system-on-chip to develop new co-design methods for embedded AI systems.




                                                          28
                     Tomasz Kryjak is an Associate Professor at the Embedded Vision Systems Group, Department
of Automatic Control and Robotics, AGH University of Krakow, Poland. His research focuses on embedded per-
ception and control systems implemented in SoC FPGAs, with an emphasis on hardware-aware algorithm design.
His application domains span mobile robotics (including drones and autonomous vehicles), Advanced Driver As-
sistance Systems (ADAS), and intelligent video surveillance. He works at the intersection of classical frame-based
vision, event-based vision, embedded AI, and neuromorphic computing. He is an IEEE Senior Member, a Steering
Committee member of the DSD and DASIP conferences, a Technical Program Committee member of the ARC and
FPL conferences, and an Associate Editor of the Microprocessors and Microsystems journal. He has authored and
co-authored over 150 scientific publications.




                                                       29
