                                           Heterogeneous SoC integrating an open-source
                                         recurrent SNN accelerator for neuromorphic edge
                                                      computing on FPGA

                                                        Michelangelo Barocci[0009−0006−7894−5006]1 ( ), Vittorio
                                                  [0000−0001−9175−2838]2
                                             Fra                      , Enrico Macii[0000−0001−9046−5618]2 , and Gianvito
                                                                     Urgese[0000−0003−2672−7593]2
arXiv:2605.12217v1 [cs.AR] 12 May 2026




                                                            1
                                                              Department of Computer and Control Engineering,
                                                                      Politecnico di Torino, Turin, Italy
                                              2
                                                   Interuniversity Department of Regional and Urban Studies and Planning,
                                                                      Politecnico di Torino, Turin, Italy
                                                                        {name.surname}@polito.it


                                                   Abstract. The growing popularity of Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs)
                                                   and their applications has led to a significant fast-paced increase of neuro-
                                                   morphic architectures capable of mimicking the spike-based data process-
                                                   ing typical of biological neurons. The efficient power consumption and
                                                   parallel computing capabilities of the SNNs lead researchers towards the
                                                   development of digital accelerators, which exploit such features to bring
                                                   fast and low-power computation on edge devices. The spread of digital
                                                   neuromorphic hardware however is slowed down by the prohibitive costs
                                                   that the silicon tape out of circuits brings, that’s why targeting Field
                                                   Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) could represent a viable alterna-
                                                   tive, offering a flexible and cost-effective platform for implementing dig-
                                                   ital neuromorphic systems and helping the spread of open-source hard-
                                                   ware designs. In this work we present an heterogeneous System-on-Chip
                                                   (SoC) where the operations of ReckOn, a Recurrent SNN accelerator, are
                                                   managed through the integration with traditional processors. These in-
                                                   clude the RISC-V-based, open-source microcontroller X-HEEP and the
                                                   ARM processor featured in Zynq Ultrascale systems. We validate our
                                                   design by reproducing the classification results through the implementa-
                                                   tion on FPGA of the taped-out version of ReckOn in order to check the
                                                   equivalence of the accuracy and the characteristics in terms of physical
                                                   implementation. In a second set of experiments, we evaluate the online
                                                   learning capability of the solution in classifying a subset of the Braille
                                                   digit dataset recently used to compare neuromorphic frameworks and
                                                   platforms.

                                                   Keywords: Neuromorphic Computing · FPGA · Edge computing · Spik-
                                                   ing Neural Network


                                         1    Introduction
                                         Since when it has appeared about forty years ago, the term ‘neuromorphic’ is
                                         used to identify systems and models whose design rely on the architecture and
2      M. Barocci et al.

working principle of biological nervous systems [11]. The computing and engi-
neering approaches driven by such inspiration therefore aim at emulating the hu-
man brain and its functionalities [16,2,23]. In the domain of Deep Learning (DL),
the so-called third-generation of Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs), namely the
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs), gives shape to this brain-inspired paradigm
by embedding bio-plausible neuron models to perform computation through the
binary counterpart of biological action potentials. Referred to as spikes, the lat-
ter represent the neural response to a given input, and, in the simplest case,
they are generated when an internal state modelling the neuronal membrane po-
tential exceeds a threshold. Such spikes are transmitted among neurons through
synapses in the form of weighted sums [13]. From the hardware perspective,
SNNs can be deployed with tremendous advantages in terms of energy saving on
dedicated chips [9,17,19,18,5,21] that effectively exploit asynchronous and sparse
computation. Nonetheless, the limited accessibility of such platforms, coupled
with the still poor availability of other event-based devices for on-edge appli-
cations, induces to explore alternative hardware solutions relying, for instance,
on tailored design of SNN accelerators through Field Programmable Gate Ar-
rays (FPGAs) [25,12,6,1,22]. Due to the fact that standalone SNN accelerators
perform a highly specific and task-focused set of operations, their configuration
often has to undergo the supervision of external controllers [24,27]. Solutions
based on controllers that operate far from the accelerator are not ideal, since
they are not optimized from the point of view of energy efficiency, which is a
crucial aspect in edge applications. Having a local controller that manages all the
operations and communications is the preferred way for developing neuromor-
phic applications. In this paper we present the configuration of an open-source
Recurrent SNN accelerator, ReckOn [10], performed through (1) an open-source
microcontroller based on the RISC-V Instruction Set, X-HEEP [14], synthesized
on a XC7Z020 FPGA and (2) the ARM processor available in the Zynq SoCs
typical of Xilinx FPGA development boards. In the first setup, we used the SPI
peripheral of X-HEEP to configure the accelerator, while in the second setup the
ARM processor running Linux controls the operations of the accelerator that is
implemented in the Programmable Logic (PL) part of the SoC through the use
of the memory-mapped I/O AXI IPs. We tested the two architectures by repro-
ducing the results on the Cue Accumulation dataset available with the source
code of ReckOn, achieving a comparable accuracy above 96% on the test set.
Lastly, we show the performances of online learning by evaluating how the sys-
tem is able to recognize Braille digits on a reduced set of classes from the subset
used in [21]. We measured the accuracy on a 3-class subset that includes the
digits A, E, U, achieving 90% on the test set; then on 4 classes, reaching 78.8%
accuracy in the classification of the digits A, E, U, Space and 60% of digits A,
E, O U.
             Heterogeneous SoC for neuromorphic edge computing on FPGA          3

2     Background

Digital designs in the early development stages require intensive prototyping
before undergoing physical implementation like silicon chip tape out. Reconfig-
urable platforms powered by FPGAs represent a cost-effective way to prototype
digital solutions and to help the spread and accessibility of open-source designs.
Neuromorphic models, which greatly benefit from digital implementations, have
been explored in that sense: Trensch and Morrison [26] developed a Hybrid
Neuromorphic Compute (HNC) node leveraging a Zynq System-on-Chip; Clair
J. et al. [8] presented SpikeHard, a neuromorphic accelerator based on an im-
proved architecture of RANC [15], where they optimized the neuromorphic cores
mapping algorithm to minimize the resources utilization and they integrate the
system with the RISC-V core CVA6 [29]. Neuroflow [7] and Spiker+ [6] bring
instead complete training, synthesis and implementation frameworks that assist
the developer through all the stages of the SNN definition. Lastly, some projects
are also offered via open-source licensing like SENeCA [28], the aforementioned
RANC, SyncNN [20] and the target of this work, ReckOn.


2.1    ReckOn neuromorphic accelerator

ReckOn is a Recurrent SNN accelerator [10] released under open source license
on GitHub3 . The RSNN model that can be simulated comprises up to 256 in-
put and recurrent Leaky Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) neurons and 16 output Leaky
Integrate (LI) neurons. The peculiarity of ReckOn lies in its capability to per-
form both classification and regression tasks by leveraging the local in space
and time learning technique called e-prop [4], allowing on-edge online learning
applications.
     The internal architecture of ReckOn, reported in Figure 1, includes a dedi-
cated memory (SRAM) for the storage of the network weights and the hidden
neuron status, which includes the membranes’ threshold voltages, the leakage
factors, the membrane potentials and the eligibility traces that are updated dur-
ing training. The RSNN has direct access to the SRAM blocks to improve the
speed of operations: at each timestep, the hidden neurons’ membrane voltages
and traces are updated sequentially by taking into account the input spikes, leak-
age factors, and their firing activity. Input data can be sent to ReckOn encoded
as spikes through the Address Event Representation (AER) bus, which consists
of an 8-bit address channel and two REQ-ACK handshake signals. ReckOn ex-
poses an SPI interface that allows access to the internal SRAM blocks and the
internal parameter bank where the SNN configuration registers are stored to fa-
cilitate the integration with traditional systems. Inference results from ReckOn
are provided through an 8-bit bus that reports either the address of the highest
output neuron membrane (one time per sample) or a sequence of the output
layer’s membrane potentials (at each timestep) in case of a classification or re-
gression task, respectively.
3
    https://github.com/ChFrenkel/ReckOn
4        M. Barocci et al.


                                                                     ReckOn

                                                                RSNN Logic                                 Output Logic
                               Input spikes                                      Spikes
                  AER
                   IN       Parameter           Neurons             Weights                 Weights   Output update
                              Bank              Update              Update                  Update    and inference


                                                             Weights
                                                            Membranes
                                                              Traces
                  CONTROL
                                                                              RAM INTERFACE
                  SIGNALS
                                         SPI
                                      parameters
                                                                                WEIGHTS /
                                                                                                                OUT
                                                                                NEURONS
                                                                                                                DATA
                                                                                  RAM
                    SPI                 Weights/Neuron status
                   CONTR.                                                     RAM INTERFACE




                  Fig. 1: Logic Blocks-level schematic of ReckOn



2.2    X-HEEP

X-HEEP [14] is an FPGA-synthesizable open source4 microcontroller based on
RISC-V cores such as the CV32E20, CV32E40P and the CV32E40X. It has been
conceived to offer flexible support for external accelerators and to be extended
with custom IPs through dedicated interfaces such as the CORE-V-XIF and
the Extendible Accelerator InterFace (XAIF) that use the OBI protocol.
Power and resources consumption are some key aspects that are taken into ac-
count during the development of X-HEEP, and the system offers customization
options that can be applied for tailored applications. It also offers extensive sup-
port for the development of software-based applications by supplying HAL and
an integration in the PetaLinux ecosystem of Xilinx Ultrascale FPGAs.


3     Methodology

We bring ReckOn on the PYNQ-Z2 FPGA by embedding the accelerator as
a co-processor in two different systems. The first architecture provides a gen-
eral purpose solution whose implementation can be deployed on different FPGA
platforms, since the microcontroller X-HEEP can be synthesized as a standalone
digital system for various hardware targets, the second architecture exploits the
flexibility offered by the commercial Xilinx Ultrascale Zynq SoCs, where the
Programmable Logic sector is integrated via the AXI bus with the Processing
System ARM processor counterpart. The latter solution can be extended only
to systems with similar capabilities, since it also includes specific IPs available
only through Vivado.

4
    https://github.com/esl-epfl/x-heep
            Heterogeneous SoC for neuromorphic edge computing on FPGA         5

3.1   X-HEEP interfaced with ReckOn

We implemented ReckOn on FPGA by integrating the accelerator in a system
that includes X-HEEP as the main controlling unit. The architecture is shown in
Fig. 2. The firmware leverages the Hardware Abstraction Layer (HAL) functions
available within X-HEEP that allow to control the peripherals. We used the HAL
functions to configure the SPI Host IP to program the parameter bank of the
neuromorphic co-processor.



                PHYS. I/O
                                     BRAM          TEST

                                  Training DS

                   X-HEEP                         0
                                                             AER
                                                           DECODER
            UART    JTAG    SPI    Test DS
                                                  1




                                                  SPI
                                    HW           CONTR.
             HOST PC               DEBUG                   ReckOn
                                    UNIT



      Fig. 2: System-level schematic of the architecture based on X-HEEP



    As depicted in Fig. 2, the main subsystems of X-HEEP that are involved
include the UART, connected to the host PC for monitoring purposes during
the SPI configuration, the JTAG, connected to the PC as well and that is used
to deploy and debug the firmware, and the SPI host peripheral, that is used
to configure the RSNN parameters of ReckOn. We made use of the Internal
Logic Analyzer integrated in the Zynq chip to monitor the evolution and the
accuracy of the system through the HW debug unit. Training and validation
datasets are loaded during the bitfile writing stage, since they are implemented
directly by initializing the BRAMs on the FPGA. The interface from the AER
decoder towards the RAM is unique, a signal named TEST is used to specify
which dataset is being currently read by multiplexing the control signals to the
correct memory and the output data bus. The following paragraph provides an
explanation about how data is encoded within memories.
    Spikes, labels, and end-of-sample events are stored as 32-bit words, and the
information they store varies slightly depending on the type of event that is
being targeted. The 8 MSBs are dedicated to the type of event: 0x03 identifies
a spike, 0x02 the label of the sample and 0x01 the end of the sample. Bits from
6                M. Barocci et al.

23 to 12 tell the address of the target neuron for the spike, or the correct label
of the current sample. They are not used at the end of the sample. Finally, the
12 LSBs indicate the target time tick for the event. This can be interpreted as
either the tick at which the spike or the label should be delivered or the final
tick of the sample.


3.2          AER decoder

The binding element between the controllers and the SNN accelerator is the AER
decoder, an FSM-based design that is responsible for decoding the 32-bit words
stored in the buffer memory into the related input spikes and sending them to
ReckOn. At the end of each sample, it updates the per-epoch accuracy during
training and validation by reading the inferred results generated by the network.
The integration of the AER decoder within the system can be observed in Fig. 2.
The sequence of operations performed by the FSM (Fig. 3 Left) starts from the
IDLE state, which waits for the rising edge of the START input signal to assert
the SAMPLE signal and start the reading operations from the memory (READM
state), then the system increases the current time step counter until the target
is reached (TICK state, only in case of a spike), and sends the corresponding spike
or label (states SPIKE and LABEL). This set of operations is repeated until the
end of each sample (END_S state), when ReckOn sends the result of the inference
after the negation of SAMPLE. Once the target number of samples is reached, i.e.
the end of an epoch, the accuracy counter is sampled and reset (END_E state).
When the target number of epochs is reached, the system waits for a stop signal
to reset itself.


                                                                                                       TRAIN DS                           AER DECODER                              ReckOn

                                                                                                                                                               AERIN_ADDR      8
                                                                                                                                                                AERIN_REQ
                                                                                                       TEST DS                                                  AERIN_ACK
                                                                                                                                                              AERIN_TAR_EN

                                                                                                                                             MAIN
                                                                                                                               TEST          FSM                  SAMPLE
                                                         HEAD                         TICK                                   EPOCH_DONE
                                                                                                                                                               TARGET_VALID
                                                                                                             PHYS.                                              INFER_ACC
                                                                                                              I/O             START                                                SRNN
                                                                                                                                                                 TIME_TICK
                                                                   CODE = 3                                                   STOP
                                              CODE = 0                                   CURR_TICK =                                                        TIMING_ERROR_RDY
                                                                                         TARGET_TICK

                                                                                                                                                        8      OUT_DATA
                                    START                              AERIN_ACK                                             EPOCH_ACC
                       IDLE                              READ                         SPIKE                      ILA                        OUTPUT             OUT_REQ
                                                                                                                                            CAPTURE            OUT_ACK


                              cnt_epochs !=
                                                                           CODE = 2                      X-HEEP
    cnt_epochs = n_epochs     n_epochs
                                                            CODE = 1
    && STOP                                   ~OUT_ACK                                                                                                            SCK
                                                                                                                                                                  MISO              SPI
                                                                                                                       SPI




                                                                  AERIN_ACK
                                                                    || TEST                                                                                       MOSI
                      END_E       cnt_sample =       END_S                            LABEL
                                   n_samples




Fig. 3: Left: FSM state diagram of the AER decoder in the implementation with
X-HEEP. Right: I/O connection of the AER decoder subsystem.



    In Fig. 3 (Right) the schematic of the internal connections involving the
AER decoder is depicted. The RAM interface, controlled by the TEST signal,
is used to fetch the training or validation data from the memories, the control
signals from the Physical I/O subsystem are utilized to initiate/terminate the
             Heterogeneous SoC for neuromorphic edge computing on FPGA            7

operations of the accelerator, ascertain whether the AER decoder has completed
reading the data or to signal if the current set of samples represents a training or
test dataset through TEST, so the AER decoder is able to raise the appropriate
signals for learning or inference. The EPOCH_ACC counter signal is sampled by the
Integrated Logic Analyzer (ILA) which has been synthesized, and it represents
the number of correct inferences in the current epoch, the SPI bus is used as
a mean of communication for the configuration of ReckOn. Signals related to
ReckOn, which include the AER_IN bus, the OUT_DATA bus, and the control signals
to and from the co-processor are on the Right. Input spikes and output inferences
employ 8-bit channels and 4-phase handshakes, other signals used to control the
operations of ReckOn are the SAMPLE signal that traces the beginning and the
end of each sample, the TIME_TICK signals to communicate each timestep, the
INFER_ACC signal that averages the output membranes to provide the output
inference, and the TARGET_VALID signals which is used to activate the weight
updates through the e-prop. Finally, the TIMING_ERROR_RDY signal is used by
ReckOn to signal the readiness of the system to receive a new timestep.

3.3   ARM controller interfaced with ReckOn
The objective of this second solution is to overcome the constraints imposed by
the limited memory of the previous architecture. It is evident that the mechanism
of saving all data in the BRAM is not optimal for storing large datasets, such
as the Braille dataset that will be presented later. In this second version, we
exploited the ARM-based processor available on the Zynq platform to safely store
datasets with the operating system and perform periodic batch offload operations
on the BRAMs. The Zynq-7020 chip’s processing systems (PS) capabilities are
leveraged to program and control the neuromorphic accelerator implemented in
the programmable logic (PL) section through the AXI interface. This design can
be synthesized only with a specific family of Zynq Ultrascale devices. A similar
approach has been recently adopted by [12].
The system is composed of four main layers, as illustrated in Fig. 4. These are
the Software layer, the AXI layer, the Hardware layer, and the Debug layer.

Software layer It revolves around the Jupyter server, which is native to the
PetaLinux image of the PYNQ board. It is used to access the AXI configuration
registers of the different translation IPs. Following the initialisation process,
during which the accelerator is configured via the SPI interface, the dataset is
fed to the accelerator by offloading batches of samples into the buffer BRAM.
The ARM controller then awaits the assertion of the signals BATCH_DONE or
EPOCH_DONE by the AER decoder to initiate the offloading of the next batch.

AXI layer It operates on the memory-mapped AXI I/O interface, which is avail-
able on the Zynq chip. This interface is the optimal mean of facilitating com-
munication between the PS and PL sides, thanks to the AXI translator bridges
available as IPs: the AXI-QUADSPI bridge, the AXI-BRAM bridge and the AXI-GPIO
bridge. Once the IP memory-mapped registers have been written to allow one
8      M. Barocci et al.


                   Software Layer             AXI Layer                                   Hardware Layer
       MICRO SD


                                                           AXI                    Buffer Memory
                                        M00               BRAM
                    AXI                                   Control
                  MASTER                                                                                      AER
        ARM                     S00     M01                                                                 DECODER
     CONTROLLER    GP0
                                                           AXI
     PROCESSING
                                    AXI                   GPIO
       SYSTEM                   INTERCONN



                                                       AXI
                   ETH                  M02
                                                     QUAD SPI

                                                                                           SPI
                                                                                          CONTR.
                                                                            ILA
                                                                                                     ReckOn
                                                                    DEBUG                         RSNN accelerator
                                    HOST PC
                                                                     UNIT


                                                      Debug Layer



Fig. 4: System-level schematic of the ARM-controlled architecture. The dashed
lines delimit the perimeter of the four layers.



slave device on the bus and a single-channel MISO/MOSI communication, the
AXI-QUADSPI bridge is employed to perform the initial configuration of ReckOn
by reading the necessary data from a text file. The samples are offloaded in
batches into a shared BRAM memory via the AXI-BRAM bridge. Batching is
necessary in the case of large datasets that would otherwise require a memory
depth exceeding the maximum available BRAM in the XC7Z020 chip. Finally,
we interact with the system via GPIOs controlled by the AXI-GPIO bridge.

Hardware layer It contains all the HDL architectural components that are added
at system-level in the design. It includes all the ReckOn building blocks (SPI
slave, SRNN etc.), the FSM-based AER packets decoder and a main wrapper
that packages the system with the PS Block design.
The previous design of the AER decoder was modified by adding support for
the processing of batches of samples. We introduced a new state in the FSM
and new control signals, which collectively enhance the flexibility and runtime
configuration of the decoder (Fig. 5 Right). Signals NEW_EPOCH, NEW_BATCH,
BATCH_DONE and EPOCH_DONE are connected to the GPIO subsystem. As op-
posed to using physical buttons, this approach simplifies the design by using
GPIOs to communicate with the AER packets decoder whenever a batch/epoch
has been processed or stored in the memory. Additionally, it allows us to deter-
mine whether the current batch is part of a training or validation dataset, as
some input signals of ReckOn behave differently in the two cases. Separately, the
updated controlling parameters (Fig. 5 Right in gray) are the SPI parameters
that are passed to the AER decoder FSM. In this instance, the parameter bank
of the SPI slave of ReckOn was expanded with additional parameters that af-
ford greater configuration flexibility during runtime. These include the number
                              Heterogeneous SoC for neuromorphic edge computing on FPGA                                                                                               9

of samples per epoch and per batch, the number of epochs, and the delay with
which the inference label should be sent (for the delayed supervision task). In
the FSM, the HEAD state was removed, as all configuration is now transmitted
via SPI, the state END_B was introduced, wherein the system enters when the
number of processed samples reaches the specified batch size target. This is indi-
cated by the assertion of the BATCH_DONE signal, and the system then awaits the
controller’s action of filling the memory with the subsequent batch and asserting
the NEW_BATCH signal. Fig. 5 (Left) depicts the updated finite state machine
(FSM) state diagram of the system.

Debug layer In this layer, the evolution and behavior of the system are monitored
with the Internal Logic Analyzer (ILA) feature, which is available for synthesis
and can be used directly from the Vivado GUI. Once the set of epochs has been
completed and the final testing dataset has been processed, the data is exported
and post-processed with a Python script.


                                                                                               AXI                   BRAM           AER DECODER                              ReckOn

                                                                                                                                                         AERIN_ADDR      8
                                                                                                                                                          AERIN_REQ
                                                                                                     BRAM



                                                                                                                                                          AERIN_ACK
                      END_B                       END_S                                                                                                 AERIN_TAR_EN
                                   ~OUT_REQ
                                                                                                                                       MAIN                 SAMPLE
                                                                                                               NEW_EPOCH               FSM               TARGET_VALID
                                                                               SPIKE
      cnt_sample_epoch =                                                                                        NEW_BATCH                                 INFER_ACC          SRNN
                                  NEW_BATCH
                                                                                                     GPIO




       SPI_N_SAMPLES                                                                                           EPOCH_DONE                                  TIME_TICK
                                                                 ~AERIN_ACK
                                                                                                               BATCH_DONE                             TIMING_ERROR_RDY
                                                CODE = 0x01                                                       TEST
                                                                                 CURR_TICK =
                      END_E                                                      TARGET_TICK                                                      8      OUT_DATA
                               NEW_EPOCH                                                                                              OUTPUT             OUT_REQ
                                                                                                                        EPOCH_ACC     CAPTURE
                                                                                                               ILA                                        OUT_ACK
    cnt_epochs = n_epochs
    && STOP                                        READ                        TICK                                                                    SPI_N_EPOCHS
                                                                 CODE = 0x03                                                                           SPI_N_SAMPLES

                                                                                                                                       PARAM           SPI_BATCH_SIZE
                                  NEW_EPOCH
                       IDLE                                                                                                                              SPI_TIMING
                                                                                                                                                      SPI_LABEL_DELAY         SPI
                                           CODE = 0x02        ~AERIN_ACK
                                                                                                                                                            SCK
                                                                                                     QUADSPI




                                                                                                                                                            MISO
                                                                                                                                                            MOSI
                                                         LABEL




Fig. 5: Left: FSM state diagram of the AER decoder in the implementation with
the ARM cores, Right: Detailed I/O connection of the AER decoder subsystem
with the AXI layer and ReckOn.




4        Results
We synthesized our architectures targeting the XC7Z020 programmable chip,
demonstrating the feasibility of performing on-the-edge machine learning appli-
cations on low-end hardware. The following subsections report the details of the
FPGA resources occupancy. We bring support for both microcontrollers and pro-
cessors capable of running a standalone Linux-based operating system. On one
side, the system allows users to write bare metal code on X-HEEP. On the other
side, the system leverages the Python SDK to control the memory-mapped AXI
peripheral. We validate our solutions by comparing the accuracy of the SNN
model deployed on our architectures with the ones obtained with the silicon,
demonstrating that there is no significant discrepancy. Finally, we introduce a
10       M. Barocci et al.

new application inspired by a recent study that compared different neuromorphic
devices on the Braille digits classification dataset.

4.1    FPGA resources utilization
We synthesized the two architectures on a PYNQ-Z2 development board from
TUL. The board is powered by a Zynq-7020 chip, which offers a powerful en-
vironment to test hardware designs thanks to the coexistence of a Dual-Core
ARM Cortex-A9 Processors, defined as the Processing System (PS), capable
of running Linux and offering extensive SDK for its hardware, and a XC7Z020
FPGA, defined as the Programmable Logic (PL) unit through a multi-purpose
AXI bus. The PL can implement digital hardware design that take up to 53200
Look-Up Tables (LUTs), 106400 Flip-Flops, 140 Block RAMs, 220 DSPs and
125 I/O buffers.

X-HEEP microcontroller - ReckOn implementation Ran at 10 MHz, the
X-HEEP controlled architecture occupies a total of 45651 LUTs, 145 DSPs,
and 94 BRAM tiles. Other resources were allocated for the debug unit, refer to
Table 1 for more details. The presence of initialized BRAMs for the storage of the
dataset doubles the ones that are required for the storage of weights and neurons
in ReckOn, bringing the total usage at almost 100%. Also, the coexistence of a
microcontroller and its neuromorphic counterpart leaves small room for other
possible additional implementations.



       Table 1: Zynq-7020 FPGA resource utilization table - with X-HEEP
                        LUT1           Flip-Flops       DSPs            BRAM
ReckOn                  31768             3357            144              37
AER decoder2             131               187             0               41
X-HEEP                  13755             17659            1               16
Debug unit3              2832             4932             0               5.5
Total (% Utiliz.)    48483 (91.1%)   26125 (24.55%)   145 (65.9 %)   99.5 (71.07%)
Total available         53200            106400           220             140
  1
      Includes LUT as logic and LUT as Memory.
  2
      Includes also the BRAM resources used to store the two datasets.
  3
      The number of LUTs, FFs and BRAM tiles may vary according to the number of
      debug signals, number of samples and pipe stages.




ARM processor - ReckOn implementation Without accounting for the
debug unit, the whole architecture took 37528 LUTs, 144 DSPs, and 56 BRAM
tiles (more details in Table 2). We ran the system at a frequency of 15 MHz.
With respect to the previous version this design occupies less resources, since
the controlling element is already implemented physically in the chip, allowing
               Heterogeneous SoC for neuromorphic edge computing on FPGA        11

extra space for additional IPs, like the AXI bridges we make use of. By reducing
the amount of BRAMs necessary for the storage of data, it was possible to
allocate more resources to the debug unit.



    Table 2: Zynq-7020 FPGA resource utilization table - with the ARM cores
                         LUT1           Flip-Flops        DSPs            BRAM
ReckOn                   33764             3342             144              37
AER decoder               136               186              0                0
PS2                       3628             4799              0               19
Debug unit3               3804             6633              0              64.5
Total (% Utiliz.)     41335 (77.7%)   14977 (14.08%)   144 (65.45 %)   120.5 (86.07%)
Total available          53200            106400            220              140
    1
        Includes LUT as logic and LUT as Memory.
    2
        Includes also the shared BRAM resources utilization.
    3
        The number of LUTs, FFs and BRAM tiles may vary according to the number of
        debug signals, number of samples and pipe stages.




4.2      Binary decision navigation

We ran the following experiment to demonstrate the equality in terms of accuracy
of our FPGA-implemented system and the physical implementation on a silicon
chip of ReckOn. The dataset contains a collection of visual cues that are given
to rodents to turn left or right in a controlled environment, and it’s used to
represent an example of delayed supervision, showing the capabilities of the e-
prop learning algorithm in long-term memory SNNs [3]. We reproduced the same
network, with 40 input neurons, 100 recurrent hidden neurons and 2 output
neurons and we performed 10 training and validation epochs on the same 50-
samples datasets that is available on the GitHub page of ReckOn5 and that is
used within the RTL testbench to compare the performances. Fig. 6 shows the
results obtained using the two configurations, superimposed to the per-epoch
accuracy of the RTL simulation. We achieved average 92.4% (X-HEEP), 92.2%
(ARM) accuracy on the training dataset and 96.8%, 96.4% accuracy during
validation, while the RTL simulation 92.2% during training and 97.4% during
validation. The accuracy obtained with the taped out silicon chip, as described in
the original paper, is 96.4%, thus confirming no substantial differences in terms
of accuracy.




5
    https://github.com/ChFrenkel/ReckOn
12      M. Barocci et al.




Fig. 6: Per-epoch accuracy during training and validation of the binary naviga-
tion dataset: X-HEEP implementation to the Left and ARM implementation to
the Right. Both results are superimposed to the results of the RL simulation



4.3   Braille digits classification

We further tested our architecture on the Braille digits dataset [18], which con-
sists in a set of samples collected by sliding a sensorized fingertip over Braille
digits and reading the capacitance values from the 12 separate capacitive sensors
over a 60 mm slide. The Braille digits dataset was originally tested in [18] using a
2-layer Recurrent Spiking Neural Network model on Intel’s Loihi. More recently,
the same dataset, reduced to 7 classes, (digits A E I O U Y Space) was used to
benchmark the RSNN implementations on different neuromorphic commercial
hardware exploiting the Neuromorphic Intermediate Representation (NIR) [21]
framework. With ReckOn, we reduced the dataset to three classes (characters
A E U ) and we configured the same network used in NIR, i.e. with 12 input
neurons and 38 hidden recurrent neurons (reset to zero firing mechanism) and
training it on 200 epochs (the number of output neurons depends on the number
of classes). Later on, we used the same network configuration and perform 200
training epochs using the dataset extended to 4 classes by adding the Space and
the O digits, respectively. We divided the full 1400 samples dataset in training
(980 samples), validation (280 samples) and test (140 samples) sets, as in NIR.
We trained the network during 200 epochs and we verified the intermediate re-
sults on the validation dataset every 5 epochs. We determined the accuracy at
the end of the 200 epochs with the test set.


3 classes subset Fig. 7 shows the accuracy results during training and valida-
tion over 200 epochs on the 3-classes dataset: we achieve an average accuracy of
78.9% during validation, with the best result (93%) obtained at epoch 45. The
final accuracy is measured at 90% on the test set using the following hyperpa-
rameters: 0x03F0 as the threshold, 0x0FE as the alphas LSBs and 0x37 as the
kappa value.
            Heterogeneous SoC for neuromorphic edge computing on FPGA       13




Fig. 7: Per-epoch accuracy during training and validation of the RSNN imple-
mented in ReckOn (reset to zero firing mechanism, 38 hidden neurons) with the
Braille dataset reduced to three classes, digits A, E, U




4 classes subsets The results in Fig. 8 show the results on the Braille digits
dataset reduced to four classes as explained in the section. We achieved a test
accuracy of 78.8% on the dataset containing digits Space, A, E, U and 60% on
the dataset containing digits A, E, O, U by keeping the same hyperparameters
as in the previous configuration.




Fig. 8: Per-epoch accuracy during training and validation of the RSNN imple-
mented in ReckOn (reset to zero firing mechanism, 38 hidden neurons) with the
Braille dataset reduced to four classes: digits Space, A, E, U on the Left and
digits A, E, O, U on the Right
14      M. Barocci et al.

5    Conclusion

We created an interface to control and configure a Recurrent SNN accelerator,
ReckOn, creating an heterogeneous ecosystem for the development of neuromor-
phic embedded applications that leverages either a microcontroller running a
firmware, or a dual-core ARM processor running an OS. We integrated ReckOn
as a co-processor of X-HEEP and we validate the architecture on FPGA by
replicating a use-case previously performed in the silicon chip of ReckOn. Later
on, we switched our controlling unit to the ARM-based Processing System of
Zynq SoCs running a Linux OS, which commands the accelerator through the
AXI bus. This solution allows to execute larger task of edge machine learning
by using the internal BRAMs as buffer memories, where the batches of samples
can be offloaded temporarily while the whole dataset is safely stored in the in-
ternal memory. We validate this architecture by synthesizing the accelerator in
the Programmable Logic side of the SoC and by running an online learning task
of Braille digits classification. The latter experiments will be further expanded
in future works, which will involve a full comparison with the results obtained
with state-of-the-art neuromorphic hardware evaluated in the NIR framework
by implementing the same classes in the dataset.

Acknowledgments. This research is funded by the European Union - NextGener-
ationEU Project 3A-ITALY MICS (PE0000004, CUP E13C22001900001, Spoke 6).
This work is partially supported by the European Commission and the Italian Min-
istry of Enterprises and Made in Italy (MIMIT) under the KDT ISOLDE project (G.A.
101112274). We acknowledge a contribution from the Italian National Recovery and
Resilience Plan (NRRP), M4C2, funded by the European Union – NextGenerationEU
(Project IR0000011, CUP B51E22000150006, “EBRAINS-Italy”).

Disclosure of Interests. for example: The authors have no competing interests to
declare that are relevant to the content of this article.


References

 1. Barocci, M., Fra, V., Macii, E., Urgese, G.: Review of open neuromorphic archi-
    tectures and a first integration in the RISC-V PULP platform. In: 2023 IEEE
    16th International Symposium on Embedded Multicore/Many-core Systems-on-
    Chip (MCSoC) (2023)
 2. Bartolozzi, C., Indiveri, G., Donati, E.: Embodied neuromorphic intelligence. Na-
    ture communications 13 (2022)
 3. Bellec, G., Salaj, D., Subramoney, A., Legenstein, R., Maass, W.: Long short-
    term memory and learning-to-learn in networks of spiking neurons. In: Advances
    in Neural Information Processing Systems (2018)
 4. Bellec, G., Scherr, F., Subramoney, A., Hajek, E., Salaj, D., Legenstein, R., Maass,
    W.: A solution to the learning dilemma for recurrent networks of spiking neu-
    rons. Nature Communications 11(1), 3625 (Jul 2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/
    s41467-020-17236-y
              Heterogeneous SoC for neuromorphic edge computing on FPGA                 15

 5. Bos, H., Muir, D.: Sub-mw neuromorphic snn audio processing applications with
    rockpool and xylo. In: Embedded Artificial Intelligence. River Publishers (2023)
 6. Carpegna, A., Savino, A., Carlo, S.D.: Spiker+: a framework for the generation
    of efficient Spiking Neural Networks FPGA accelerators for inference at the edge.
    arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01141 (2024)
 7. Cheung, K., Schultz, S.R., Luk, W.: Neuroflow: A general purpose spiking neural
    network simulation platform using customizable processors. Frontiers in Neuro-
    science 9 (2016). https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2015.00516
 8. Clair, J., Eichler, G., Carloni, L.P.: Spikehard: Efficiency-driven neuromorphic
    hardware for heterogeneous systems-on-chip. ACM Trans. Embed. Comput. Syst.
    22(5s) (sep 2023). https://doi.org/10.1145/3609101, https://doi.org/10.
    1145/3609101
 9. Davies, M., Srinivasa, N., Lin, T.H., Chinya, G., Cao, Y., Choday, S.H., Dimou, G.,
    Joshi, P., Imam, N., Jain, S., Liao, Y., Lin, C.K., Lines, A., Liu, R., Mathaikutty,
    D., McCoy, S., Paul, A., Tse, J., Venkataramanan, G., Weng, Y.H., Wild, A., Yang,
    Y., Wang, H.: Loihi: A Neuromorphic Manycore Processor with On-Chip Learning.
    IEEE Micro 38 (2018)
10. Frenkel, C., Indiveri, G.: Reckon: A 28nm sub-mm2 task-agnostic spiking recurrent
    neural network processor enabling on-chip learning over second-long timescales. In:
    2022 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC). vol. 65, pp. 1–3
    (2022). https://doi.org/10.1109/ISSCC42614.2022.9731734
11. Indiveri, G., Linares-Barranco, B., Hamilton, T.J., Schaik, A.v., Etienne-
    Cummings, R., Delbruck, T., Liu, S.C., Dudek, P., Häfliger, P., Renaud, S., et al.:
    Neuromorphic silicon neuron circuits. Frontiers in neuroscience 5 (2011)
12. Linares-Barranco, A., Prono, L., Lengenstein, R., Indiveri, G., Frenkel, C.: Adap-
    tive Robotic Arm Control with a Spiking Recurrent Neural Network on a Digital
    Accelerator. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.12849 (2024)
13. Maass, W.: Networks of spiking neurons: The third generation of neural network
    models. Neural Networks 10 (1997)
14. Machetti, S., Schiavone, P.D., Müller, T.C., Peón-Quirós, M., Atienza, D.: X-heep:
    An open-source, configurable and extendible risc-v microcontroller for the explo-
    ration of ultra-low-power edge accelerators (2024)
15. Mack, J., Purdy, R., Rockowitz, K., Inouye, M., Richter, E., Valancius, S., Kumb-
    hare, N., Hassan, M.S., Fair, K., Mixter, J., Akoglu, A.: Ranc: Reconfigurable ar-
    chitecture for neuromorphic computing. Trans. Comp.-Aided Des. Integ. Cir. Sys.
    40(11), 2265–2278 (nov 2021). https://doi.org/10.1109/TCAD.2020.3038151
16. Marković, D., Mizrahi, A., Querlioz, D., Grollier, J.: Physics for neuromorphic
    computing. Nature Reviews Physics 2 (2020)
17. Mayr, C., Hoeppner, S., Furber, S.: Spinnaker 2: A 10 million core processor system
    for brain simulation and machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.02385 (2019)
18. Müller-Cleve, S.F., Fra, V., Khacef, L., Pequeño-Zurro, A., Klepatsch, D., Forno,
    E., Ivanovich, D.G., Rastogi, S., Urgese, G., Zenke, F., Bartolozzi, C.: Braille letter
    reading: A benchmark for spatio-temporal pattern recognition on neuromorphic
    hardware. Frontiers in Neuroscience 16 (2022)
19. Orchard, G., Frady, E.P., Rubin, D.B.D., Sanborn, S., Shrestha, S.B., Sommer,
    F.T., Davies, M.: Efficient Neuromorphic Signal Processing with Loihi 2. In: IEEE
    Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SiPS). vol. 2021-Octob (2021)
20. Panchapakesan, S., Fang, Z., Li, J.: Syncnn: Evaluating and accelerating spiking
    neural networks on fpgas. ACM Trans. Reconfigurable Technol. Syst. 15(4) (dec
    2022). https://doi.org/10.1145/3514253
16      M. Barocci et al.

21. Pedersen, J.E., Abreu, S., Jobst, M., Lenz, G., Fra, V., Bauer, F.C., Muir, D.R.,
    Zhou, P., Vogginger, B., Heckel, K., et al.: Neuromorphic Intermediate Representa-
    tion: A Unified Instruction Set for Interoperable Brain-Inspired Computing. arXiv
    preprint arXiv:2311.14641 (2023)
22. Pham, Q.T., Nguyen, T.Q., Hoang, P.C., Dang, Q.H., Nguyen, D.M., Nguyen,
    H.H.: A review of snn implementation on fpga. In: 2021 International Conference
    on Multimedia Analysis and Pattern Recognition (MAPR). pp. 1–6 (2021). https:
    //doi.org/10.1109/MAPR53640.2021.9585245
23. Schmidgall, S., Ziaei, R., Achterberg, J., Kirsch, L., Hajiseyedrazi, S., Eshraghian,
    J.: Brain-inspired learning in artificial neural networks: a review. APL Machine
    Learning 2 (2024)
24. Schuman, C.D., Kulkarni, S.R., Parsa, M., Mitchell, J.P., Kay, B., et al.: Oppor-
    tunities for neuromorphic computing algorithms and applications. Nature Compu-
    tational Science 2 (2022)
25. Siddique, A., Vai, M.I., Pun, S.H.: A low cost neuromorphic learning engine based
    on a high performance supervised SNN learning algorithm. Scientific Reports 13
    (2023)
26. Trensch, G., Morrison, A.: A system-on-chip based hybrid neuromorphic compute
    node architecture for reproducible hyper-real-time simulations of spiking neural
    networks. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics 16 (2022). https://doi.org/10.3389/
    fninf.2022.884033
27. Urgese, G., Rios-Navarro, A., Linares-Barranco, A., Stewart, T.C., Michmizos, K.:
    Powering the next-generation iot applications: new tools and emerging technologies
    for the development of neuromorphic system of systems. Frontiers in Neuroscience
    17, 1197918 (2023)
28. Yousefzadeh, A., van Schaik, G.J., Tahghighi, M., Detterer, P., Traferro, S., Hij-
    dra, M., Stuijt, J., Corradi, F., Sifalakis, M., Konijnenburg, M.: Seneca: Scalable
    energy-efficient neuromorphic computer architecture. In: 2022 IEEE 4th Interna-
    tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence Circuits and Systems (AICAS). pp.
    371–374 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1109/AICAS54282.2022.9870025
29. Zaruba, F., Benini, L.: The cost of application-class processing: Energy and perfor-
    mance analysis of a linux-ready 1.7-ghz 64-bit risc-v core in 22-nm fdsoi technology.
    IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems 27(11), 2629–
    2640 (Nov 2019). https://doi.org/10.1109/TVLSI.2019.2926114
