                                              Current-Limiting Control for Fault Ride-Through of LLC-based
                                                         Solid-State Transformer in Data Centers
                                                                         Haoyu Wang Chi Zhang Mafu Zhang
                                                                              Rudy Wang Peter Barbosa∗
arXiv:2608.26595v2 [eess.SY] 9 Sep 2026




                                                                                              Abstract
                                                    Solid-State Transformers (SSTs) are increasingly proposed as the interface between distribution
                                                grids and data centers due to flexible power flows and fast dynamic response. However, when
                                                a short-circuit fault occurs in a load branch, the SST with a voltage-source-type DC-DC
                                                stage is forced to shut down due to fault currents. Therefore, current-limiting strategies are
                                                strongly needed to prevent catastrophic equipment damage and cascading blackouts by instantly
                                                restricting massive current spikes and offering sufficient currents for protection devices to act at
                                                the faulted branch. This paper proposes a coordinated DC load fault-tolerant current-limiting and
                                                recovery strategy embedded directly in the control of the SST DC-DC stage, avoiding additional
                                                hardware cost. Specifically, the fault mechanism of an example LLC resonant converter is studied.
                                                Accordingly, a fault detection framework is implemented, a closed-loop current controller is
                                                proposed to limit the DC current to a designated value within microseconds by surging the
                                                switching frequency and adjusting the duty cycle, and a ramped recovery stage will then restore
                                                the DC bus after the fault isolation without inrush currents. Experiments on an LLC converter
                                                prototype have verified the feasibility of the proposed current-limiting strategy, enabling faster
                                                and lower-cost fault response suitable for resilient data center power architectures.

                                          Keywords: Current limiting, data center, DC-DC control, LLC converter, short-circuit fault,
                                          solid-state transformer.


                                          1    Introduction
                                          The rapid growth of artificial intelligence and cloud computing has driven the power demand
                                          of data centers to unprecedented levels, motivating a shift toward medium-voltage AC (MVAC)
                                          to low-voltage DC (LVDC) architectures, with industry roadmaps targeting in-rack distribution.
                                          Solid-state transformers (SSTs) with higher efficiency, reduced conversion stages, and improved
                                          compatibility, are well positioned to serve as the grid interface for such DC buses [1–12]. In many
                                          of the SST architectures, the isolated DC-DC stage is realized with voltage-source-type output
                                          behavior, such as LLC resonant converters [13], as shown in Fig. 1.
                                              A key challenge is that a short-circuit fault occurring at a downstream load (e.g., rack level)
                                          collapses the load impedance and drives fault currents to rise within tens of microseconds [14].
                                          For a voltage-source-type DC-DC stage like LLC converters attempting to sustain the bus voltage
                                          across the collapsed impedance, an unmitigated fault can drive the resonant current well beyond its
                                          rated value before any breaker-based protection, forcing the system to shut down and causing fatal
                                          damage to data centers [15]. Load branches are typically protected by fuses or circuit breakers that
                                             ∗
                                               This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice,
                                          after which this version may no longer be accessible.


                                                                                                   1
Figure 1: System diagram with DC load faults. (a) SST in Data Centers. F denotes protection
devices like fuses. (b) An example of voltage-source-type LLC converters as the DC-DC stage.


are cleared by I 2 t characteristics, selective isolation thus requires the current to be neither unlimited
nor blocked, but regulated at a designated level for a specified period of time [16]. Therefore, there
is growing interest in current-limiting strategies that can provide substantial currents for protection
devices to ride through the fault without system damage.
    Existing approaches to load-side fault management generally fall into three categories: (1)
hardware-based protection in series with the feeder (e.g., DC circuit breakers and fault current
limiters) that adds cost [14, 17]; (2) converter-level over-current protection that clamps the tank to
optionally reconstruct the resonant current from tank voltages, which does not hold a specified current
or address restoration [15, 18]; (3) Control-level fault ride-through that temporarily reconfigures
control architecture and keeps the SST a controllable source for the MV side during a fault [19, 20]
or without a closed form [21]. The third category without additional hardware is attractive for data
centers, allowing the SST to isolate only the faulted load branch, but there lacks a comprehensive
current-limiting strategy for SSTs.
    Building on the control-level philosophy, this paper proposes a coordinated current-limiting and
recovery strategy embedded at the control level of the DC-DC stage of data-center-facing SSTs,
especially for the voltage-source types, targeting a downstream DC load short-circuit fault rather
than a fault on the DC bus. The contributions of this paper are:

   • A comprehensive analysis of the load-side fault mechanism for LLC converters and a corre-
     sponding fault detection framework to instantly restrict the fault current.

   • A unified current-limiting architecture with a closed-loop current regulator that maintains
     the DC current at a designated level, allowing fault isolation and resilient operation without
     additional hardware.


                                                    2
    • A coordinated ramp design that jointly restores the switching frequency and duty cycle after
      isolation, bounding the inrush current and ensuring a soft recharge.




         Figure 2: The example fault currents of LLC converters without current limiting.




Figure 3: Proposed DC fault-tolerant current-limiting and recovery strategy for LLC converters: (1)
normal DC-DC operation, (2) fault detection, (3) DC current limiting, and (4) recovery, together
with the corresponding waveforms of enable, fs , D, Vdc , and Idc , and the control block diagram
used in each stage.



2     DC Fault Mechanism and Analysis
An LLC DC-DC converter is studied as an example, as shown in Fig. 1(b). It comprises a full-bridge
inverter S1−4 with an input voltage Vi that drives a resonant tank (Lr , Cr , Lm ), a transformer T

                                                 3
of turns ratio n1 : n2 , and a full-bridge diode rectifier D1−4 with a capacitor Co . Suppose that a
short-circuit occurs near loads, causing a small output resistance Rs that reflects to the primary
side as:
                                                 8 n1 2
                                                     
                                          Rac = 2           Rs .                                 (1)
                                                π     n2
    During the fault, the second-order resonant tank behaves as:

                                  d2 ir      dir            1 dvs
                                     2
                                        + 2α     + ωr2 ir =       .                              (2)
                                  dt         dt             Lr dt
   Define the resonant frequency, characteristic impedance, damped coefficient, damped frequency,
and damping ratio as:
                                                 −1
                                                           q
                           ωr = 2πfr = Lr Cr , Z0 = Lr /Cr ,
                                        p

                                 Rac          q                α                              (3)
                            α=       , ωd = ωr2 − α2 , ζ =        .
                                 2Lr                           ωr
   With the switching frequency fs = fr (1 + δ), the steady-state peak resonant and DC currents
can be expressed as:
                                      4Vi                    2 n1
                         îr,∞ ≈ q                , Iˆdc,∞ =      îr,∞ .                   (4)
                                π Rac2 + 4δ 2 Z 2            π n2
                                                0

    The transient overshoot for the underdamped system is:
                                                         !
                                               πζ
                                 Mp = exp − p                ≈ e−πζ .                            (5)
                                              1 − ζ2

    The peak transient currents are approached at t = π/ωd :

                                                   Iˆdc,pk ≈ Iˆdc,∞ 1 + e−πζ .
                                                                        
                       îr,pk ≈ îr,∞ 1 + e−πζ ,                                                 (6)

    Other types of DC-DC converters can be analyzed in similar ways. Generally, a small Rs will
lead to large peak currents in a very short time, causing severe system damage, as shown in Fig. 2.
Thus, a current limiting strategy is strongly required.


3     Current Limiting and Recovery Strategy
The proposed current limiting strategy, as illustrated in Fig. 3, is implemented entirely within a
local Digital Signal Processor (DSP) and requires no communication with downstream protection
devices, making it suitable for fast autonomous fault ride-through. Generally, it consists of 4 main
stages: normal operation, fault detection, current limiting, and recovery, with each described below
for LLC converters.

3.1   Stage 1: Normal DC-DC Operation (t0 ≤ t < t1 )
Under normal conditions, DC-DC operation of SSTs usually adopts multifarious closed-loop control
strategies according to the specific topology. Typically, the DC-DC stage regulates the DC voltage
Vdc to its reference Vdc,ref using a cascaded voltage-current closed-loop control.
    During this stage, the duty cycle D of the switched-node voltage vs is maintained at its nominal
value (i.e., typically D = 1) while the frequency modulation regulates the voltage.


                                                   4
3.2     Stage 2: Fault Detection (t1 ≤ t < t3 )
When a short-circuit load fault occurs at t1 , resulting in low equivalent impedance Rs of the
DC bus, the DC current Idc rises sharply as analyzed, which can be utilized as an intuitive and
accurate indicator of fault occurrence. Therefore, fault detection can be continuously implemented
at hardware level by analog comparators or at software level by current sensing, then it is detected
by condition:
                               F = (Idc > Idc,fault ) ∩ (dIdc /dt > ζfault )                      (7)
where Idc,fault is the fault threshold of the DC current and ζfault is the threshold of its increasing rate.
Considering Idc is sensed in the original control, the software-level comparison can be implemented
without additional hardware. For example, for each data from current sensors, the analog-digital
conversion including the sensor response takes 5 µs while the transmission through optical fibers
takes another 5 µs. Therefore, it takes 10 µs for the DSP to receive the instantaneous current
information, which is acceptable for SSTs with low frequencies (e.g., 100 kHz).
    When the fault is flagged at t2 , the DSP immediately disables switches to prevent Idc and ir
from being too high until Idc is discharged to a system-friendly level before the current-limiting
controller takes authority at t3 .

3.3     Stage 3: DC Current Limiting (t3 ≤ t < t4 )
After a duration of switch disabling, the converter needs to maintain a certain amount of current
Idc,lim under the low impedance condition to melt fuses and isolate the fault branch. Therefore, at
t3 , the controller transitions to the proposed current limiting strategy that contains two coordinated
parts.

3.3.1    Frequency Surge:
For the LLC converter, the voltage conversion ratio is:
                                                     Dπ
                                                                 
                                               k sin
                          n1 Vdc                      2
                       M=        = s                                                                   (8)
                          n2 Vi                1 2
                                                    
                                                       kZ0
                                                           
                                                                   1
                                                                     2
                                     (k + 1) − 2 +           fn −
                                              fn       Rac        fn

    where k = Lm /Lr , fn = fs /fr , and the transmitted power is P = Vdc   2 /R while the required
                                                                                s
power is Plim = Idc,lim
                   2    Rs .
    Notably, M (fn , D) decreases with fn . Therefore, the current limiting strategy commands that
fs is stepped up rapidly to a limiting value fs,lim (e.g., fs,lim = 2fr ), immediately reducing the
instantaneous power capability and providing a fast first line of current reduction. Moreover, the
frequency surge reduces the switching period, making the duty cycle control introduced below more
feasible in real controllers.

3.3.2    Closed-Loop Current Control via Duty Cycle
As illustrated by (8), M (fn , D) can change significantly with D, where a small D leads to a very
low M that is suitable for the current-limiting case. The variation of D can be achieved by adding
an internal phase shift between S1 and S4 in LLC converters or equivalent actions in other types
of DC-DC converters, and provides a feasible solution to regulating the current during fault with



                                                     5
closed-loop control. The proposed current loop is structurally analogous to traditional current
control but referenced to Idc,lim , and ramps the duty cycle from its default value toward Dlim :
                                                                  Z
                         D = Kp,lim Idc,lim − Idc + Ki,lim                                             (9)
                                                                                 
                                                                      Idc,lim − Idc dt.

     The combined action of the frequency surge and the current loop regulates Idc to a constant
Idc,lim during the fault, while Vdc is allowed to collapse toward a reduced Vdc,lim . This stage typically
persists for milliseconds, allowing protection devices to isolate the fault branch.

3.4   Stage 4: Recovery (t ≥ t4 )
Once the fault is cleared at t4 , Idc drops to a very small value due to the restored resistance and
Vdc begins to rise. The controller detects the fault isolation and switches to recharge the DC bus
and restore healthy operation. Re-energizing the bus directly at nominal operation would risk an
inrush current, causing potential device damage. The proposed strategy instead applies rate-limited
ramps to fs and D for soft charging:

                       fs (t) = fs,lim − kf (t − t4 ),       D(t) = Dlim + kD (t − t4 )              (10)

where kf and kD are the ramp rates, and fs and D are clamped between the limiting and nominal
values. This produces a controlled monotonic recharge of Vdc and Idc back to nominal values in
milliseconds, after which control authority is returned to the normal closed-loop operation.


4     Experimental Verification
Experiments based on an LLC converter prototype, as shown in Fig. 4, are conducted to verify the
feasibility of the proposed strategy. The main parameters of the converter are illustrated in Table 1
and the switches are IMZ120R030M1H SiC MOSFET. Specifically, the LLC converter works with
Vi = Vdc =400 V and RL =80 W under normal conditions (i.e., the output power is 2 kW). A small
resistance Rs =2 W is placed to simulate the DC fault for illustrative purposes.




                     Figure 4: The experimental prototype of LLC converters.


                                                         6
                        Table 1: Main parameters of the experimental setup.
Parameter            Value           Parameter             Value             Parameter             Value
   Vi                400 V              Vdc,ref             400 V                fr               154 kHz
   RL                 80 W               Rs                  2W                fs,lim             300 kHz
   Lr                7 µH                Lm                 70 µH             n1 : n2               1:1
   Co                 3 µF               Cr                0.15 µF            Idc,lim              15 A


     The experimental results are shown in Fig. 5. Specifically, Fig. 5(a) shows the overall performance
of the converter during the DC fault transition, where the converter shows an exceptional capability
to handle the fault for safety and provide the required current for fault isolation. Fig. 5(b) illustrates
the normal waveforms where fs = fr = 154 kHz, Vdc =400 V, and Idc =5 A. The DC fault occurs
(i.e., Rs is connected) in Fig. 5(c), forcing Vdc to decrease and Idc and ir to increase rapidly and
reach peaks of 117 A and 44 A in 10 µs, respectively. Note that when Idc exceeds Idc,fault =20 A, the
controller disables the switches for the next switching cycle, preventing the currents from becoming
fatally high. After Co is fully discharged, the controller increases fs to 300 kHz and switches to the
closed-loop current control for current limiting. As shown in Fig. 5(d), Idc is stably controlled to
Idc,lim =15 A by adjusting the duty cycle D of vs and Vdc stays at 30 V. The whole stage lasts for
several milliseconds, offering enough time for fuses to melt. In Fig. 5(e), the fault is isolated, and
fs and D remain the same initially and change with the designed ramp rates for the subsequent
recovery, as shown in Fig. 5(f).




Figure 5: Experimental verification of the proposed strategy on an LLC converter. (a) Overall
performance. (b) Normal operation without fault. (c) Transient period of fault occurrence. (d)
Current-limiting stage. (e) Transient period of fault isolation. (f) One period in recovery after fault.


                                                    7
    The experiments verify that the LLC converter can provide sufficient currents under the proposed
current-limiting strategy during the fault and recover under ramped switching frequency and duty
cycle without inrush currents in the resonant tank, thus offering a feasible solution to riding through
faults.


5    Conclusion
This paper presented a fault-tolerant current-limiting and recovery strategy for the DC-DC stage of
solid-state transformers serving DC data center buses, especially voltage-source types. Specifically,
the proposed strategy detects the fault by current sensing and firmware-level comparison, and limits
the DC fault current to a designated value for milliseconds by coordinating a switching-frequency
surge with a dedicated duty-cycle-based closed-loop current controller, so that fuses or circuit
breakers can isolate the faulted load branch and keep the SST enabled. A subsequent coordinated
rate-limited recovery stage then restores nominal operation without excessive inrush currents during
the recharge. The proposed strategy is implemented at the control-loop level and entirely within the
local controller, and it requires no additional hardware cost and no communication with downstream
protection devices, making it well suited to the speed and reliability requirements of resilient data
center power architectures. Experiments on an LLC converter have verified that the proposed
strategy can restrict the massive fault current spikes, limit the current for protection devices, and
restore the bus without inrush currents.


References
 [1] A. Huang et al., “The future renewable electric energy delivery and management (FREEDM) system:
     The energy internet,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 99, no. 1, pp. 133–148, 2011.
 [2] H. Wang et al., “ZVS soft switching operation region analysis of modular multi active bridge converter
     under single phase shift control,” IEEE Trans. on Ind. Electron., vol. 70, no. 7, pp. 6865–6875, 2023.
 [3] D. Mou et al., “Reactive power minimization for modular multi-active-bridge converter with whole
     operating range,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 38, no. 7, pp. 8011–8015, 2023.
 [4] H. Wang et al., “Universal phase-shift modulation scheme and efficiency optimization for modular
     multiactive bridge converter,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 71, no. 7, pp. 7312–7321,
     2024.
 [5] H. Wang, S. Ji, D. Mou et al., “Switching characterization and power loss optimization for modular
     multiactive bridge converter under common phase shift control,” IEEE Journal of Emerging and Selected
     Topics in Power Electronics, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 3924–3936, 2023.
 [6] D. Mou et al., “High-efficiency time-division multiplexing modulation technology for modular multiactive
     bridge converters,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 71, no. 6, pp. 5745–5754, 2024.
 [7] H. Wang et al., “High-frequency-link-based reactive-power optimal control for modular multi-active
     bridge converter,” IEEE Journal of Emerging and Selected Topics in Industrial Electronics, vol. 5, no. 3,
     pp. 1333–1337, 2024.
 [8] H. Wang, D. Mou, S. Ji et al., “Comparison and improvement of zvs operation under different modulation
     strategies for modular multi active bridge converters,” in 2023 IEEE Energy Conversion Congress and
     Exposition (ECCE), 2023, pp. 2556–2563.
 [9] M. Xiang et al., “Design and analysis of a 75 kva high-frequency-link based three-port power electronic
     transformer,” in 2021 IEEE 1st International Power Electronics and Application Symposium (PEAS),
     2021, pp. 1–7.


                                                      8
[10] J. Zheng et al., “Physics-embedded neural odes for sim-to-real edge digital twins of hybrid power
     electronics systems,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 73, no. 6, pp. 8616–8627, 2026.
[11] J. Zheng, H. Wang, Y. Zeng et al., “Cognitive digital twins-based model predictive control for high-
     frequency power converters,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 72, no. 12, pp. 13 310–
     13 321, 2025.
[12] H. Wang, S. Ji, D. Mou, and Y. Zeng, “Model-free approximate fundamental reactive power minimization
     for modular multi-active bridge converter,” in 2024 IEEE 7th International Electrical and Energy
     Conference (CIEEC), 2024, pp. 2068–2073.
[13] J. Deng et al., “Design methodology of LLC resonant converters for electric vehicle battery chargers,”
     IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 1581–1592, 2014.
[14] B. Perea-Mena et al., “Circuit breakers in low- and medium-voltage DC microgrids for protection against
     short-circuit electrical faults: Evolution and future challenges,” Applied Sciences, vol. 12, no. 1, p. 15,
     2022.
[15] X. Xie et al., “Analysis and optimization of LLC resonant converter with a novel over-current protection
     circuit,” IEEE Trans. on Power Electron., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 435–443, 2007.
[16] R. Kheirollahi et al., “Coordination of ultrafast solid-state circuit breakers in radial DC microgrids,”
     IEEE J. Emerg. Sel. Top. Power Electron., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 4690–4702, 2022.
[17] C. Meyer et al., “Solid-state circuit breakers and current limiters for medium-voltage systems having
     distributed power systems,” IEEE Trans. on Power Electron., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 1333–1340, 2004.
[18] B. Yang et al., “Over current protection methods for LLC resonant converter,” in Eighteenth Annual
     IEEE Applied Power Electronics Conference and Exposition, 2003 APEC, vol. 2, 2003, pp. 605–609.
[19] H. Weng et al., “A DC solid-state transformer with DC fault ride-through capability,” IEEE J. Emerg.
     Sel. Top. Power Electron., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 3617–3630, 2022.
[20] R. Li et al., “Active control of DC fault currents in DC solid-state transformers during ride-through
     operation of multi-terminal HVDC systems,” IEEE Trans. Energy Convers., vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 1336–1346,
     2016.
[21] S. Liu et al., “Short-circuit current control strategy for full-bridge LLC converter,” in 2014 IEEE Energy
     Conversion Congress and Exposition (ECCE), 2014, pp. 3496–3503.




                                                       9
